Health checks • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Data connectivity & integration Health checks Overview 

 Health checks

Health checks enable monitoring and alerting on common issues across datasets and other resource types. You can monitor for potential issues related to dataset status, time, size, content, and schema using customizable checks. When problems are detected, you will receive in-platform notifications and emails alerting you to the issue.

This section of documentation provides detailed references about available health check options. For high-level guidance on how to set up effective health checks, review the section on maintaining pipelines . In particular, the page on recommended health checks may be helpful.

If you need to monitor resources that health checks do not cover, if you want coverage that scales when additional resources are added, or if you need an easier way to monitor many similar resources, consider using monitoring views instead of health checks.

 Create and configure health checks

You can create checks for the following resources:

Datasets

You can also create checks through code .

Schedules

Tables

The checks that are available for a specific resource type can be found on the Health tab of the Data Health application. Review the monitoring rules reference to learn the available checks.

 Health tab

The location of the Health tab is resource-dependent.

 For datasets: While viewing a dataset in Dataset Preview , you can navigate to the Health tab to add new checks, modify existing checks and view historic check results.

 For schedules: With a schedule open in Data Lineage, select Metrics > Health to view health checks and monitoring views, each listed in its own view.

 For tables: While viewing a table in Dataset Preview , you can navigate to the Health tab to add new checks, modify existing checks and view historic check results.

 Viewing health

You can access health check status and details at different levels depending on your monitoring needs.

 Pipeline health

In Data Lineage , datasets can be colored by their health check status. Additionally, the Data Health tab at the bottom of the page (toggled on in Settings) shows the health checks and their statuses for all datasets in the lineage graph.

 Platform-wide health

To see an overview of health checks for all datasets, select the Data Health application from the sidebar. In the Data Health application, you can filter or sort datasets by their status or name. You can also toggle to show only the datasets that you are watching. This page also lets you add new health checks by selecting Add health check in the top-right corner.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Overview 

 NEXT Types of checks 
 →