Data Connection • Sources • Source exploration • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Data connectivity & integration Data Connection Sources Source exploration 

 Source exploration

When setting up syncs from a source, you may want to explore the source and the data it contains to preview syncs before they bring data into Foundry. Depending on the source type, Data Connection allows you to preview data from a sync via the Explore page.

To access the Explore page, follow the steps below:

Navigate to the Sources page and click on the name of the source you want to configure.

Select the Explore link from the Explore and Create Syncs component of the Sync page.

 Table-based data

 Left panel: Find and add tables and views from the source system to the graph. Use the free text search helper to find specific tables, or browse the tree to find resources.

 Graph: Explore tables and views and the relationships between them. You can also create a sync from the graph by right-clicking on the table. When selecting a table with a relation, the foreign key will be highlighted within the expandable column list and above the link.

Note that the graph is not always available for table-based data exploration. For example, a graph would not appear for exploration of a table-based REST API model as there are no clear relations between objects.

 Table details: Preview a sample of the selected table.

 Right panel: Review chosen tables, and create syncs for the tables.

 File-based data

 Left panel: Explore and select the directory containing contents to sync into Foundry.

 Preview: See a preview of the files that will be synced. A filter can be added to control which files get imported into Foundry.

 Right panel: Review chosen tables, and create syncs for the tables.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Set up a source 

 NEXT Syncs / Set up a sync 
 →