The Challenges of Building an Architecture from Scratch
One of our Foundry for Builders partners shares why they decided to build on Foundry
Palantir
Follow
6 min read
·
Apr 7, 2022

65

Press enter or click to view image in full size

There’s no shortage of foundational decisions that startups and other emerging companies need to make at an early stage, especially when it comes to building a technical stack that can support future development efforts and business goals. When internal resources are sacred and generating value quickly is critical, startups must be data-driven and efficient at their core. After all, speed-to-value could mean the difference between winning and losing altogether.

Building a truly resilient and flexible tech stack is no small endeavor. Companies hire dozens or hundreds of engineers and spend years building infrastructure platforms to scale their businesses — just ask us. When we started to ideate on Foundry, our technology platform for operational decision-making, we realized that the core building blocks we needed simply weren’t available on the market. Sure, there were open source tools out there, but they were narrowly focused and didn’t work for deployment models beyond a single cloud. Moreover, piecing together a patchwork was too brittle for scaling a high growth business, and it didn’t give our engineers and operators any real lift when responding to cross-cutting issues. So, we decided to build the entire toolkit we needed ourselves.

As it turns out, what we thought would take a few months took us five years of intensive R&D to create.

Confronting uncertainty

One of the key tenets Palantir kept in mind while building Foundry was that the world is infinitely complex, with problems and solutions in constant flux. Our open architecture is purpose-built for this kind of environment — and as it so happens, the environments of our startup customers and day zero partners tend to have significant uncertainty and risk.

To learn more about what a startup looks like from the inside and why even small companies might choose to build on Foundry, we asked one of our Foundry for Builders partners to weigh in. Below, Gelu Vrabi, VP of Engineering at VayuAI, gives us a first-hand take on what his company’s needs were and why VayuAI decided to build on Foundry.

What were your considerations when building a technical foundation for your business?

The main considerations for anyone trying to build the data infrastructure for their business will always be development time (which affects revenue as well as costs, since more time means more developer hours), cost of the services or software used, and what is usually referred to as “technical debt” — or, more accurately, the scalability of the solution. Nothing scales perfectly with zero cost, so this is more of a spectrum.

I would say the main advantages of Foundry are in improving scalability through the way data processing and access is managed in the data ontology, as well as either reducing development time compared to building from scratch, or cost compared to more niche solutions that tend to cover only part of the infrastructure landscape.

How does Foundry’s ontological layer make your data infrastructure more efficient and secure?

One way that Foundry makes an engineer’s life much easier is simply managing permissions, which the ontology makes much easier. Any organization dealing with a significant number of users and data complexity will need to build internal tools that basically replicate the data ontology in Foundry. Enterprises need to be able to see the data lineage (including the data processing code), control how much access to the underlying data a user has, and permitting users to request access and discover what they need access to themselves. So, the data ontology is essential tooling that is not easy to build but greatly improves the security and efficiency of your data infrastructure.

Did you set out to build a data foundation to solve a single business problem? How did your chosen data foundation adapt to changing business needs?

At Vayu, we had a few business problems that we were trying to optimize for in the beginning, as we have both an IIoT solution that has its own challenges and requirements, as well as a more typical SaaS offering that is partly integrated with the IIoT solution but also offers other types of services, like data aggregation and simulation-on-demand. But on top of all this, what you almost always find when running a business is that you have new requirements, or at least new opportunities, that always come with increased complexity for your data infrastructure.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

In view of this ever-increasing complexity, flexibility is crucial. We’ve found that the improved scalability (both technically and in terms of managing complexity) that Foundry offers is a great enabler.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
The Palantir SaaS solution grows and evolves alongside our customers.
How complex was your data landscape before Foundry? How many source systems did you need to connect?

Prior to Foundry, we were mainly storing data in a data lake and a few RDS databases in AWS. There were a few sources for this data, such as our IIoT devices, our cloud simulations, third party services/APIs, and user-uploaded data.

Which point solutions did you avoid purchasing because you had comparable functionality already in Foundry?

On the data exploration and visualization side, Foundry removes the need to purchase and use separate products like Excel and Tableau or deal with lower level infrastructure constructs like EC2 instances and Sagemaker Notebook instances. Since all the tools are on the same platform, they integrate much more deeply with the data stores than these alternatives. This makes the whole process more efficient (no importing or copying-and-pasting data into Excel, no database credentials and querying into Tableau, etc.).

I’ve mentioned some of the pros and cons compared to our approach (which was leaning more towards building from scratch) and other potential options, but one thing I wanted to highlight in particular is Foundry’s toolkit for visualization, which includes products like Slate or Contour. These tools are really a huge enabler for Vayu compared to the other options on the market.

In contrast with something like Tableau, the ease of use and deep integration of some of the “simpler” tools in Foundry can really enhance the ability of non-technical stakeholders to access and consume data. Even more impactful for us, Slate, an application-builder, enables us to develop our SaaS offering far faster and cheaper than building a web application from scratch.

Focus on what matters

Though no two organizations are quite the same, we’ve heard many companies like VayuAI emphasize the importance of building on top of a platform that has a massive range of functionality out of the box, in one environment. Regardless of size, companies should focus ruthlessly on building the business or the product that sets them apart, that differentiates them from the rest of the market, and that allows them to do so faster.

VayuAI’s experience shows that three of the things that matter to many tech-forward organizations are scalability, flexibility, and reducing integration complexity. When VayuAI first decided to use Foundry, the company already had a complicated data infrastructure that would only get more complex, so it needed a solution that could scale over time. Palantir’s Foundry platform enables not only scalability, but also configurability: Foundry can easily adapt to new or modified workflows, interface configurations, emerging data and technology availability, and changes to regulations or governance models. Finally, Foundry was designed for use by both technical and non-technical users; people can collaborate over business logic, algorithms, code, formulas, spreadsheets, using built-in, user-friendly applications while also contributing their decisions and learnings back into the ontology.

Foundry’s fully managed cloud environment enables organizations to derive long-term value quickly from a rapidly deployable commercial platform, while avoiding the significant hidden costs and compounding technical debt that often arise with custom development and patchwork solutions.

Dr. Karp speaks to the differentiation companies see by building in Foundry From managing data across jurisdictions to developing advanced digital twin simulations, Palantir CEO Alex Karp discusses how we’ve purpose-built our software to handle disruption and dislocation. Watch the full video.