Object and link types • Object type groups • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Object type groups 

 Object type groups

Object type groups are a classification primitive that help users better search and explore their ontology. Groups are created and managed using Ontology Manager, generally by ontology owners and editors .

 Group configuration

Groups are created and managed via the groups menu, accessible in the Ontology Manager sidebar.

Groups can also be added directly to object types by selecting Edit groups in the object type overview page.

 Group search and discovery

Groups are searchable in Ontology Manager's Search bar and Search bar dialog . The table of object types in Ontology Manager supports displaying and filtering by group. Groups are also displayed on the Object Explorer home page .

 Group permissions

To view object type groups, users must have viewer permission on the project that the object type group is in.

 Legacy group migration

As of May 22, 2024, the group primitive described on this page has replaced the tag-based system of legacy groups.

In most cases, legacy groups were automatically migrated to object type groups at this time. Ontology owners were notified via an Upgrade Assistant intervention if manual action was necessary.

 Group name visibility

Previously, if all object types inside a group were non-discoverable to a certain user (for example, due to access controls on backing datasets), the group was also non-discoverable to the user. As mentioned in the section above on group permissions , all groups will now be discoverable to any user that can view the ontology. This change aligns group visibility with other ontology primitives to increase clarity and transparency in governance.

 Migration of partially visible groups

Legacy groups that were not discoverable to one or more users were not eligible for automatic migration. In these cases, ontology owners were notified via an Upgrade Assistant intervention that manual action was necessary.

On May 22 2024, legacy groups that could not be safely migrated were hidden from operational users across all applications such as Workshop and Object Explorer. To provide backward compatibility, the names of legacy groups remain stored as type class metadata on object types.

Ontology owners may continue to manually migrate these hidden, legacy groups using Ontology Manager. To do this, navigate to the Ontology Configuration menu in the bottom left corner and select Approve all Groups for migration .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Metadata / Statuses 

 NEXT Add Ontology types to a Marketplace product 
 →