Automate • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Use case development Automate Overview 

 Automate

Automate is a fully backwards-compatible product that replaces Object Monitoring as the single entry point for all business automation in the platform.

 Automate is an application for business automation. With Automate, you can define conditions that are checked continuously or on a schedule, along with effects that execute automatically when the specified conditions are met.

Conditions can be time-based conditions ("trigger every Monday at 9 AM"), object data conditions built on top of the Foundry Ontology ("trigger when a new Alert object with priority high is added"), or a combination of time-based and object data conditions.

 Available effects: 

Submit Foundry actions 

Trigger AIP Logic functions 

Send platform and email notifications with attachments

 Use cases

Automate can be used for a variety of different automation workflows, including:

 Scheduled report sending and digests: Specify a time and send out weekly reports to a predefined list of recipients. PDFs generated from Notepad or Notepad templates can be attached to emails automatically.

 Data alerting: Define and watch object sets and alert users when specific data conditions are met; for example, when the total count of open issue objects crosses a threshold.

 Workflow automation: Automate can be used to automatically perform Actions on object data meeting specified criteria. Some tasks that can be automated include:

Checking for data anomalies and automatically passing those objects into an Action with logic to remediate the issue.

Watching for suggestions or potential Actions and automatically applying them when preconfigured event and time conditions are met. Such Actions could include making an API call to an external system via Webhooks to apply a change directly in the external system.

 Watched searches: Configure automations to notify when saved object explorations have new results or when an aggregate criterion is met across all results from a search; for example, the maximum temperature across all sensor objects crosses a threshold.

 Access Automate

To access Automate, select the Automate application icon in your Foundry navigation sidebar. Follow the steps in our documentation on getting started with Automate to begin.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Application building / Custom widgets / Open a URL in Workshop 

 NEXT Getting started 
 →