Authentication • Multi-factor authentication • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Management & enablement Authentication Multi-factor authentication 

 Multi-factor authentication

Access to Foundry requires multi-factor authentication , which may either be performed in Foundry with app-based two-factor authentication or directly in your identity provider. Learn more about Palantir's recommendations for identity security. 

After configuring a SAML 2.0 integration, click the back arrow at the top of the page and expand the Multi-factor authentication section to select a multi-factor authentication method for your users.

Once you have set up multi-factor authentication, move on to Organization assignment .

If you are unable to generate codes for multi-factor authentication, or if a user in your organization requires a multi-factor authentication reset, first check with your organization’s IT team to find out how your multi-factor authentication is managed.

 If your multi-factor authentication is managed by your organization's IT through your identity provider 
Your IT team will need to manage any reset requests.

 If your multi-factor authentication is managed in Foundry 
A Foundry Platform Administrator in your organization can reset two-factor authentication/multi-factor authentication with the following steps:

In Foundry, go to Account > Settings from the bottom left corner of the browser.

Under Platform Settings , select Users .

Search for the user in question, and select their name from the list.

A sidebar should appear with an option to Reset two-factor auth method... . Select this option.

In the confirmation screen, confirm you would like to complete the reset.

Upon confirmation, you will receive a success message and the user should receive communications regarding next steps to reset their multi-factor authentication method.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Self-service user directory / Manage users within your enrollment 

 NEXT Intake forms 
 →