Compass • Data Catalog • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Security & governance Compass Data Catalog 

 Data Catalog

The Data Catalog is an interactive view of curated data and other resources in Foundry. You can analyze every dataset in Foundry if you have the correct permissions, but the datasets in the Data Catalog are likely the most useful or relevant to you.

To access the Data Catalog, select Files from the workspace navigation sidebar, then the ✔️ icon at the top.

 Collections and files

The Data Catalog is organized into Collections and Files . A file in the Data Catalog could be any saved analysis, dataset, module, or other resource that may be relevant to your use cases. Collections are groups of those files that contain all curated data for a given topic, audience, or purpose. Anyone can view collections and their descriptions, but you will only have access to curated files that are shared with you.

By default, Organization administrators have the permission to add and remove resources from collections and manage who has this permission. Check with your Organization administrator if you would like the permission to add and remove resources from collections.

Select a collection to view the files or resources it contains.

Throughout Foundry, Data Catalog data is indicated by the purple checkmark badge, as seen above.

Select a dataset or other resource to open and examine it.

 Filters

A Filters panel is available in the Files tab and within each collection. You can choose tags to filter the list of resources by type or tag category to easily find the content you need.

You can also group your filtered results by tags, such as Analytics or Region, for easier navigation within a collection.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Use Project details panel 

 NEXT Sensitive Data Scanner / Overview 
 →