Action types • Parameters • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Action types Parameters Overview 

 Parameters

 Parameters are the inputs of an action type. They are the interface between the Rules and other Foundry applications, such as Workshop , Slate , and Object Views . Parameters are treated like variables that contain external values. Each parameter is defined by a type, which dictates what kind of values it can take. Beyond its type, parameters have a variety of other potential configurations. Each parameter can be individually configured as to whether they are exposed in the form or not, or whether they can be changed by the user or not.

Parameters transport values across the action type and can be referenced in rules to pass the value back on an object, link, or side effect, in submission criteria, to check if an action can be submitted, to access the current value of an object property before it is changed by the action or in overrides to change the configuration of a following parameter.

Example

A parameter can take the form of a Ticket object type in an action type which allows users to modify the status of a selected ticket. A Status parameter is defined as a string. When submitting the action, the object type parameter will take the value of a selected Ticket object and the Status parameter contains the future status. The action type then passes both parameter values to the rules and executes them to edit the object.

Example

As a variable in Workshop, previous_status can take the current value of the Status property of the selected Ticket object. This can be passed to a hidden parameter in the action, Previous Status , and the Status parameter can contain the updated status. Upon submitting the action, the action type then passes both the Previous Stats and the Status values to the rules and executes them to edit the object.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Rules 

 NEXT Set parameter default value 
 →