Foundry Branching • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Developer toolchain Foundry Branching Overview 

 Foundry Branching

 Foundry Branching enables you to develop and test comprehensive end-to-end workflows in the Palantir platform that might otherwise be too disruptive or risky for a live production environment.

While code repositories , data pipelines and the Ontology support separate branching workflows, Foundry Branching provides a unified experience to make modifications across multiple applications on a single branch, test those changes end-to-end without disrupting the production environment, and merge those changes with a single click.

Foundry Branching is in active development; see the list of supported functionality for more information on available features.

 Enable Foundry Branching

Administrators can enable Foundry Branching within the Application Access section in Control Panel. Foundry Branching is currently available for Pipeline Builder, the Ontology, Workshop, datasets in Code Repositories, and running Actions on a branch.

Note that if your Workshop module contains non-Workshop elements for which Foundry Branching is not available, such as Quiver dashboards, these elements will not be modifiable on a branch.

 Example Foundry Branching workflow

You can make changes to transforms code repositories, Pipeline Builder, the Ontology, and Workshop modules on a single branch. You can also run Actions on branches without writing back edits to Main .

For instance, take a workflow that consists of a simple pipeline in Pipeline Builder that outputs a dataset used to back an object type. With Foundry Branching, you can make changes to the logic and schema of your output dataset on a branch, see these changes in Ontology Manager on that same branch, and modify the object type definition as a result.

Foundry Branching also supports a review process; developers can add reviewers for different resources depending on each resource's approval policy. Once changes are finalized and approved, they can be deployed into the Main branch. This feature ensures a safe and controlled approach to updating and improving data pipelines, the Ontology, and Workshop applications.

 Branch cost and retention

Each branch has associated compute and storage costs, and modifying large object types on a branch can incur significant additional costs. Branch cost insights in Resource Management are currently in progress. Branches are intended to be relatively short-lived, and retention policies are available to automatically close stagnant branches.

 Foundry Branching vs. release management

Foundry Branching enables development and testing of workflow changes on a separate branch. This is ideal for managing changes in a development environment, as it allows developers to work in isolation and only merge changes into the Main branch when the feature is complete. Release management is the process of managing multiple versions of resources across distinct environments that serve different purposes.

 Release management and Foundry Branching can work together harmoniously. They should not be seen as alternative solutions to the same problem, but rather complementary solutions to different problems.

For example, you can use release management and Foundry Branching together when developing a large feature that needs to be added to a workflow. Larger features could take a few weeks to develop and require foundational changes to dataset and object type schemas. You can develop this feature on a Foundry branch and merge the changes into the development environment when it is completed. Then, you can use release management to deploy these changes to your test and production environments.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Developer workspaces / Palantir extension for Visual Studio Code / Security considerations for local development 

 NEXT Integrations 
 →