Net Zero is a Data Integration Problem: How Palantir enables data-driven decarbonization
Palantir
Follow
5 min read
·
Mar 25, 2021

291

1

In 2020, organizations in every sector set or strengthened net zero targets. Manufacturers plan to minimize non-renewable materials along complex supply chains; financial services firms aim to align their portfolios with sustainable investment practices; and governments have put budgets towards a green recovery from the pandemic.

Multi-decade net zero goals are laudable, but they need to be backed up with credible decarbonization pathways. In 2021, the challenge is to align long term goals with day-to-day operations. Decarbonization requires fundamental changes. Decision makers need a detailed, data-informed understanding of operations to make the changes that, in turn, make net zero a reality.

In this blog post, we’ll look at why some common approaches to decarbonization can limit progress. If you’re interested in deploying Palantir Foundry to support your net zero efforts, reach out to us.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Carbon calculators miss the details

These are the typical steps for setting a net zero target:

Estimate aggregate emissions for the organization
Determine aggregate reduction targets
Work backwards from those to set sub-targets for each year and business group

To estimate emissions, many organizations use a carbon calculator. The logic of carbon calculators is simple: they multiply a quantity of an activity with the carbon coefficient for that activity. If employees collectively fly 500,000 miles in a given year, and the carbon coefficient for air travel is 150 g per passenger-mile, the aggregate emissions are 75,000 kg of CO2e. A global manufacturer, for example, would multiply carbon coefficients by quantities for activities relating to supply, manufacturing, distribution, and sales, and sum the totals.

But like multi-decade net zero goals, carbon calculators are low-fidelity. Aggregates and estimates make it impossible to track emissions back to the processes that caused them. The result is an incomplete record of climate footprint that can’t be broken down for analysis.

When it comes to building a detailed pathway to net zero, the aggregate emissions numbers from carbon calculators aren’t that helpful. To achieve net zero, organizations need to track their emissions in a granular way, expose them to operators, and link them to day-to-day decisions.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

To give an example: a shipping planner has been asked to create a lower emissions route for a climate-focused customer. The planner has no way to see how her decisions affect the emissions of routes under her control. Instead, she has to make assumptions from existing information, like speed, cost, and vessel utilization. This makes it difficult to develop robust low-carbon products, and means that she may miss potential optimizations.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Palantir lets shipping planners visualize the carbon metrics of shipping routes. All data is notional.

Another example is executive compensation: several organizations have announced that they will link bonuses to sustainability metrics such as carbon emissions, alongside routine performance markers like margin and growth. This is a powerful and important adjustment of incentives. But unlike financial metrics, most business leaders have no way to discover and evaluate the emissions under their control. There is no detailed accounting and reporting structure to help them pinpoint high emissions sources and identify low-hanging fruit for improvement.

Net zero is a data integration problem

Since our inception, Palantir has enabled organizations to develop pathways for complex business transformations. Our approach to net zero goals incorporates some lessons we’ve learned along the way:

High-level metrics don’t allow leaders to make nuanced decisions.
Static, annually aggregated data isn’t sufficient for understanding complex operations.
Low-level metrics, whether those are carbon emissions or the stock levels of PPE at hospitals, are tough to collect and manage.
Transformation requires bringing separate but relevant information from siloed business areas to decision makers (for example, employee travel and the fuel consumption of a compressor are totally separate business processes, but both are relevant to net zero).

To apply these observations to net zero pathways: every activity that consumes a non-renewable material or fuel should be tracked, ideally at the level of a single action, process, or item produced. Carbon calculations can then be run at a granular level, creating a rich carbon data asset that can inform a wide range of actions. This carbon data asset enables decision makers to put operations into context — laying carbon metrics over material costs and construction plans for alternate equipment, for example, or mapping them to what-if scenarios for commercial projections.

Turning pledges into pathways

Our customers use Palantir Foundry to build a carbon-focused common operating picture that allows each part of an organization to collaborate on a net zero goal. There are three key elements to this process:

1. Integrating data across an organization, including open-source and climate policy data

Data integration enables organizations to combine siloed sources into a complete picture of emissions and their associated costs and risks. Stakeholders can ask precise questions about carbon impact, such as “What intermediate products can I substitute in a supply chain to meet emissions KPIs, while also hitting cost and time requirements?” or “Which asset class in each portfolio holds the most concentrated climate risk?”

Enriching proprietary information with open-source climate data and logic increases organizations’ decision-making capabilities. For example, a manufacturer might integrate a database of current and proposed carbon-tax policies to inform site-specific emissions management plans. Or a logistics provider might integrate predefined carbon logic to translate large-scale transportation metrics into live emissions figures.

2. Modeling capabilities for simulating different carbon scenarios

Models are simulated versions of the world that enable “what-if” analysis. Linking multiple models together can simplify the cost-benefit questions behind decarbonization decisions, ranging from the operational — “Which shipping route maximizes profit and minimizes emissions?” — to the strategic — “What assets do I invest in to meet long-term CO2 targets?” Over time, Foundry’s model management capabilities allow users to analyze and learn from past decisions in order to inform future ones.

3. Flexibility to quickly assess the impact of changes and update decisions

Climate science, government policy, and decarbonization technology are all evolving rapidly. Foundry enables a high degree of flexibility in modeling and analysis, allowing organizations to quickly assess the impact of new developments and adapt their positions accordingly.

To realize long-term net zero goals, organizations need to tie strategy to operations by using data integration, granular carbon logic, and scenario modeling. Carbon metrics only become powerful when they connect to data about operations across an organization, and link back to individual actions. These metrics are the building blocks that decision-makers need to develop net zero pathways tailored to their organization’s operational reality.

If you’re interested in using Palantir Foundry to accelerate your organization’s transition to net zero, reach out to us to learn more.

Author

Phillip Marks and Chris Seewald, Palantir Deployment Strategists