Building pipelines • Streaming pipelines • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Data connectivity & integration Building pipelines Streaming pipelines Overview 

 Streaming pipelines

Streaming pipelines provide the ability to make immediate critical decisions based on real-time data. By processing data as a stream with dedicated compute, streaming pipelines are able to process records with very low latency . On average, streaming data can be accessible in the Ontology and available for analysis in time series applications, such as Quiver or Foundry Rules , in under 15 seconds. To achieve this low-latency, streams are built on top of compute that runs continuously and require different architecture and maintenance consideration compared to batch pipelines.

 Best practices

When building out streaming pipelines, consider these factors:

Streams often power highly operational workflows and require careful planning around downtime, maintenance, and logic changes to ensure high uptime and availability.

Compute for streaming runs continuously. This can result in higher compute costs than a periodic batch job. Similarly to batch pipelines, consider starting with the smallest profile available and adjust that if the scale of your data requires it.

Streams operate on a per-row basis and have constraints on the maximum row size to ensure low latency data transfers. The constraint is set to 1mb per individual row.

Streams using state (windows or aggregations, for example) require design consideration to ensure the state is not broken when changing the stream logic.

 Get started

To start using streaming pipelines in Foundry, review how to create a simple streaming pipeline , and learn about streaming transforms in Pipeline Builder . If you want to learn about connecting your data sources to Foundry, review how to push data into a stream , or how to setup a streaming sync .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Incremental pipelines / Maintaining high performance 

 NEXT Comparison: Streaming vs. batch 
 →