1

Top highlight

How we evolve APIs
Robert Fink
Follow
8 min read
·
Sep 4, 2019

254

1

Press enter or click to view image in full size

The APIs of Palantir’s software platforms are generally open to our customers and users and as such have to bear a natural tension between stability and agility. API consumers generally prefer APIs to be stable in perpetuity. For them, stability means avoiding “unnecessary” work to adapt their software to new APIs, and it means minimizing the risk of bugs and outages. API maintainers, on the other hand, prefer the freedom to change their APIs at will. They may need to change APIs when implementing new features, fixing bugs, or re-architecting a service or component.

In software, like in any other business, Customer is King, and as such the onus for reconciling the tension between stability and agility is on the API maintainer rather than the API consumer. The two extreme positions are clearly not tenable: if we never evolve our APIs then we can never roll out new features, and if we continually break our APIs then our users will sooner or later migrate to a different library or service. The middle ground is to manage API evolution carefully; to this end, I’ll present in this post some of Palantir’s developer tooling for implementing and rolling out changes to the Foundry and Gotham APIs.

We prefer our developers spend their time on API design and application logic rather than subtleties of schema changes or the mechanics of collecting API usage data. More philosophically, we strive to build tooling and frameworks that naturally lead our developers into a pit of success: Good tools allow developers to focus their attention on the important stuff, excellent tools do so in an obvious way and without hampering their creative freedom.

We’ll discuss API evolution in the context of a typical client/server setup in which a server provides a roughly CRUD-shaped service API to human or programmatic clients. Crucially, we will allow clients and servers to get updated asynchronously and without coordination; this is the requisite deployment model in microservice-based architectures where different teams own different components of the overall application and are free to update them independently.

1. Declare all APIs.

All Palantir APIs are declared in Conjure. Conjure allows our developers to reason about APIs in terms of language-independent, typed request and response objects and encapsulates lower-level concerns such as exact wire formats and data marshalling. For example, the following (abridged) snippet is part of the Conjure API for our email gateway:

types:
  definitions:
    objects:
      SendEmailRequest:
        fields:
          from: UserId
          to: set<UserId>
          email: EmailContent
          encryption: optional<EncryptionOptions>
      SendEmailResponse:
        fields:
          requestId: RequestId
          emails: list<EmailReceipt>
      EmailReceipt:
        fields:
          emailId: EmailId
          recipients: set<UserId>
services:
  EmailService:
    endpoints:
      sendEmail:
        args:
          email: SendEmailRequest
        returns:
           SendEmailResponse

Simplicity is a primary Conjure design goal. It is important to us that all developers across all supported programming languages can intuitively understand and develop against a given Conjure API. To this end, Conjure offers a very restricted set of data types (roughly: primitives, collections, and recursive objects) and abstains from more complex concepts like inheritance. Conjure code generators produce idiomatic, language-specific bindings for servers and clients that put developers on rails and accelerate development. We have found that we can avoid a large class of unintentional API breaks by limiting our developers’ exposure to RPC internals and edge cases.

2. Prefer backwards-compatible evolution.

Many API changes can be implemented such that clients won’t even notice. We call such changes backwards-compatible. W.r.t. the tension between stability and agility, backwards-compatible changes are win-win: API maintainers can offer new features to cutting edge clients without requiring all clients to upgrade to a new API. The rules for backwards-compatible API evolution are pretty straightforward in Conjure: in a nutshell, it is OK to add new API endpoints or to add new optional or collection fields to existing response objects. Let’s look at this in more detail by studying a concrete case.

First, let’s assume that the server changes its API by sending additional information in its RPC responses; for instance, in the email API sketched above, the server may include a new date field in the EmailReceipt object. Even if the client is unaware of the API change (because the server was upgraded before the client), the client has no reason to panic since its logic cannot possibly depend on the semantics of the added field. [This claim is correct in all but the most byzantine cases; for instance, adding a new field sendFailed:boolean to the EmailReceipt instead of responding with a 5xx HTTP error code in case of failure is likely not safe because old clients may will incorrectly infer that the email was sent successfully.] Conjure clients support this type of API evolution by deserializing server responses leniently: unknown fields are silently ignored.

Second, let’s consider an API change that adds an additional field to the API’s request object. If this field is required, then all old clients are immediately broken. Conversely, if this field is optional (with a default value), then old clients can continue to make requests without noticing the API change. For example, the API may support a new optional request field bcc: set<UserId>. As above, such API changes are safe in general, but may be unsafe in cases where the original API was under-specified. Conjure allows for this type of API evolution by allowing collection types to be absent in the wire format. For instance, the server interprets each of the request objects { "from": "rfink", "to": "peter", "email": {..}, "bcc": [] } and { "from": "rfink", "to": "peter", "email": {..} } as a request with an empty bcc list.

Our Conjure toolchain has tools for verifying whether a given API change is compatible w.r.t. a given previous API definition. Developers lean on these checks at CI-time to avoid unintentional breaks, and to verify whether a given change is backwards-compatible. Similar compatibility checkers are available for other RPC systems, check out Confluent’s Schema Registry for Kafka, for example.

The bottom line is that we allow compatibility-preserving API schema evolution in order to support the asynchronous development and deployment model in a microservice architecture. For such compatible changes we do not require major API version changes simply because the change won’t break anyone. Developers are empowered to make backwards-compatible changes frequently, and our Conjure toolchain makes the best way the easiest way.

3. Always offer a carrot.

Very few API users will voluntarily invest time, sweat, and tears to migrate to a new API if it doesn’t come with a carrot such as performance benefits or a new feature. The stick approach, i.e., company leadership mandating that internal teams (or, worse, customers) migrate to a new API simply doesn’t work and we only use it in exceptional circumstances like security vulnerabilities. Cosmetic changes (aka, “we should refactor this API to make it cleaner”) are a no-go unless they come with a proportional carrot.

4. Prefer evolution over revolution.

We have established above how we implement backwards-compatible changes, let’s now discuss breaking changes. We have learned the hard way that wholesale migrations from an old v1 to a new v2 API for a given service are tractable only if supported by the right mindset and tooling. Our development teams plan for long transition periods — it may take months to years to complete rollout to our fleet of hundreds of installations — and offer v1 → v2 adapters and extensive documentation to assist consumers with the migration. Consequently, even breaking changes feel more like evolution than revolution.

5. Know your users.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Requests to a given service by API version over time, different colors represent different versions. The graph illustrates how API versions change over time as servers and clients are updated. The analysis was created using our internal metrics and log analysis tooling.

Obviously, if your API has no users, then you can’t break any users. The tricky bit is figuring out when exactly your API has no users. Our general strategy for upgrading a service API from v1 to v2 is to deploy a bridge version of the service that can serve both v1 and v2 requests, then migrate all users to v2, and then delete the v1 code path. So how do we determine the point in time when the v1 API has no users?

Get Robert Fink’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

A first, obvious step is to collect request logs for all API endpoints in order to determine usage by API version. Our server frameworks (e.g., witchcraft-go) automatically emit a rich set of metrics and request logs for all API endpoints; all metrics and logs are collected centrally such that developers can track API usage over time. Conjure clients inject structured user-agent headers of the form originService/version conjureLibrary/version targetApi/version that servers analyze in order to produce detailed statistics about their clients.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
API request volume by client (horizontal) and installation (vertical, labels greyed out). The dark blue patch in the top left corner represents a misconfigured client in one particular installation that sends an empty user agent. Developers of the “oms” service created this analysis in order to track down misconfigured clients; the analysis was performed on our internal Foundry stack based on request data reported from different installations.

A complementary approach is to know your clients even before they make any requests. To this end, our deployment infrastructure forces application developers to declare API dependencies on other services. These dependencies are used at runtime to configure the RPC subsystem (e.g., routing, failover, blue/green deploy, etc.), but they also give us global visibility into the target API versions that different deployed and undeployed services are compatible with. For instance, we can order the upgrades of dependent services such that a newer client never gets deployed before the corresponding new server. We use the service dependency graph together with request logs to decide when we can phase out deprecated APIs.

6. Take it over the finish line.

Lingering code for supporting multiple API versions or deprecated features in parallel pile up over time as tech debt. It is thus important to provide developers the best possible tools for pushing API migrations over the finish line and allow them to eventually remove and consolidate unused code paths. Request logs are one such tool. A second one is a collection of code maintenance and rewriting tools; let’s take a look at two such tools.

A common struggle in multirepo setups is to move API consumers forward by updating their dependencies and shared libraries. We use the gradle-consistent-versions plugin to declare all library and service dependencies, and automation tools like Excavator to upgrade dependencies transparently. Together, those tools empower API maintainers to do the bulk of the API migration work on behalf of their consumers. Crucially, all backwards-compatible API upgrades are merged automatically (assuming the CI tests pass) so that consumer API versions don’t diverge from service API versions over time.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Rolling out new APIs is always a gradual process: instead of coordinating all APIs users for a point-in-time v1 → v2 switch, we support both versions until our monitoring shows that all users have migrated to v2.

The rollout of a breaking v1 → v2 API change has three stages. First, we manually upgrade a small number of v1 clients to v2. This “beta test” allows us to fix remaining API quirks and to observe the performance of the new v2 API in production environments. Second, we automate the v1 → v2 upgrade with code rewriting tools like Refaster. Finally, the last few stray v1 requests are often hard to migrate with automation tools, either because the repositories are outside of our control, or because their build systems are outdated (and thus inaccessible to automated migration), or because their clients are written in a non-standard (i.e., non-Conjure) framework.

Conclusion

I’m always keen to learn how other developers and organizations solve the technical problems I encounter at Palantir. Feel free to get in touch!

Author

Robert has shaped the engineering culture and architecture behind Palantir Foundry since day one of the data analysis platform. He enjoys technical writing as a means for education and knowledge dissemination.