Object and link types • Properties • Base types • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Properties Base types 

 Base types

Property base types define the kind of data that can be stored in a property. For a complete reference of all supported property base types, see the properties overview .

 Base types are used to define properties on objects. The base type of a property determines the set of operations available for that property in user applications. All field types are valid base types except for Map , Decimal , and Binary types.

Base types also include the following advanced types:

 Vector: A type for storing vectors on objects for use in a semantic search.

 Geopoint : A type for defining properties that represent geographic points .

 Geoshape : A type for defining properties that represent geographic shapes .

 Attachment: A type for storing files on objects for use with functions on objects .

 Time series: A type for defining a property as a time series .

 Media reference: A type for defining a reference to a media file .

 Cipher text: A type for storing a string value encoded with Cipher .

 Struct: A type for defining schema-based properties with multiple fields .

All base types may be used in arrays to represent multiple values for a property, excluding the Vector and Time series types.

 Complex property base types

Some property base types require additional configuration or have specific use cases. Refer to the sections below for information on the following property base types:

 Media references : Reference media items stored in media sets.

 Struct types : Complex structured data with multiple fields.

 Media references

A media reference property type allows you to have media on your objects, such as images, videos, audio files, and documents. A media reference points to a specific media item within a media set . The media reference contains information about the media file, which means Foundry can display the media wherever the media reference is used.

 Media reference format

Below is an example media reference:

 Copied! 

 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 {
 "mimeType": "image/png",
 "reference": {
 "type": "mediaSetViewItem",
 "mediaSetViewItem": {
 "mediaSetRid": "ri.mio.main.media-set.00000000-0000-0000-0000-00000000000",
 "mediaSetViewRid": "ri.mio.main.view.00000000-0000-0000-0000-00000000000",
 "mediaItemRid": "ri.mio.main.media-item.00000000-0000-0000-0000-00000000000"
 }
 }
} 

The media reference includes the following:

 mimeType : The file's media type.

 reference : A reference containing the media set RID, view RID, and specific media item RID.

 Configure media reference properties

Object types with media reference properties are backed by a dataset. The backing dataset must include a media reference column, which will map to the media reference property. This column type is specifically designed to store media reference values and ensures proper integration between your ontology objects and media sets.

Additionally, a media reference property must have a media source , which can be configured in the Capabilities tab of the object type. This media source should be the media set that the media references point to.

 Structs

A struct is an ontology property base type that allows users to create schema-based properties with multiple fields. Struct properties are created from struct type dataset columns. To learn more about structs, refer to the complete struct documentation.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Mandatory control properties 

 NEXT Property reducers 
 →