Object and link types • Value types • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Value types Overview 

 Value types

 Value types are semantic wrappers around a field type that include metadata and constraints that can enhance type safety, improve expressiveness, and provide additional context. Value types encapsulate domain-specific data types and enforce data validation in a manner reusable across the platform. Unlike object types, properties, link types, or other types that define and build the Ontology, value types are associated with a space in the platform. A space can hold a single ontology. Value types can only be used within the space in which they were defined. Value types are not available for the Default ontology.

Dataset field types and property base types reflect the primitive types found in programming languages. These types are domain-agnostic and provide no domain context. By contrast, value types capture the context and semantic meaning of data and centralize data validation. Users define and consume meaning directly from the value type, rather than relying on surrounding information such as column names or property descriptions. Value types also enforce their validation constraints on data in Builder pipelines and the ontology, so data integrators and ontology managers can ensure proper semantic typing in their data flows and models.

For example, a user can define an “email” value type that has a regular expression constraint to ensure any property that uses the value type represents a valid email address. This value type can then be reused across multiple object types and pipelines without having to duplicate the validation logic for every such property. Additionally, each property that uses this value type is explicitly understood to contain an email address.

Since value types are intended for reuse across multiple pipelines and object types, they are permissioned to ensure users can apply them where needed and versioned to handle both breaking and non-breaking edits.

Get started by learning how to create a new value type or use an existing value type on a property.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Allow users to edit objects and links 

 NEXT Create a value type 
 →