Developer Console • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Developer toolchain Developer Console Overview 

 Developer Console

Use Developer Console to build and manage Custom Applications and their associated authorization clients and SDKs. A custom application allows developers to extend Foundry capabilities with custom logic hosted in or outside of Foundry. Legacy Oauth clients are also managed in Developer Console.

 Custom applications

The primary components of a custom application are as follows:

 Authorization client: An OAuth client that allows human and service users programmatic access to Foundry.

 SDKs: One or more SDKs generated from resources added to an application. See Application scopes .

 SDK documentation: Auto-generated API documentation and code snippets tailored to your application's SDK.

 Permissions: User and application-level access controls. See Permissions .

 Metrics: Usage and performance insights for your application. See Application metrics .

 Web hosting (optional): Host a custom frontend on a Foundry subdomain.

 Code repository (optional): A linked code repository resource for application code.

 OAuth clients

OAuth clients are a legacy primitive similar to custom applications, but contain only an authorization client and none of the other capabilities listed above . OAuth clients have typically been used to grant unscoped access to programmatic users. It is recommended that unscoped applications be used instead of an OAuth client.

 Developer Console landing page

The Developer Console landing page lists the custom applications and OAuth clients that you have access to.

For more information on access requirements, review the permissions documentation .

 Application pages

 Application overview

From the application overview page, you can:

View website hosting status and generated SDK versions.

See the ontology resources included in your application scope.

Edit the application metadata or delete the application.

For OAuth clients, see Managing an OAuth client in Developer Console .

 OAuth and scopes

Configure the authentication flow and resource access scope for your application. The scope ensures tokens only grant access to resources approved for the application.

Learn more about configuring permissions and application scopes .

 SDK documentation

Each application includes auto-generated API documentation tailored to its SDK content. You can access it by selecting API documentation from the left panel.

The API documentation includes:

Installation guides for your application-specific SDK.

Code examples for loading individual objects and fetching pages of data.

Reference materials for each ontology object type, action type, and function.

Use the language dropdown menu to switch between TypeScript, Python, and other supported languages.

 Sharing and tokens

Share your application with users, groups, and organizations. Generate long-lived scoped tokens for programmatic access.

 Web hosting

Host frontend-only applications, such as React SPAs, directly on Foundry, eliminating the need for external hosting infrastructure.

For more detail, review the documentation on hosting an OSDK application on Foundry .

 Metrics

Monitor application performance including request volume, success rates, and API latency.

 Learn more about application metrics. 

 Limits

By default, each Developer Console application is limited to a total of 1000 data resources and resource access scopes. Reach out to a Palantir administrator if you encounter this limitation.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Foundry APIs and SDKs / FoundryTS / API Reference / search.ontology 

 NEXT Core concepts / OAuth clients 
 →