Top highlight

Leveling Up Your Company: A lexicon for digital transformation success
Palantir
Follow
9 min read
·
Nov 22, 2019

490

4

Over the course of fifteen years and hundreds of customer deployments, we at Palantir have had some time to reflect on what drives impactful digital transformation — and there’s even more learning left to do. But what we do know is that digital transformation is a journey, not a destination; and when done right, businesses should see impactful operational improvements every step along the way.

We’ve developed a framework to help organizations evaluate their progress along the journey, using our experience to help tackle the obstacles at every turn. In this post, we’ll walk through the five levels of enterprise autonomy, explaining the methodology and milestones critical to becoming a truly data-driven company. Join us as we level up the conversation about digital transformation.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
The five levels of enterprise autonomy
Asking the right questions

So where do you start? Our clients typically approach us with one of two conundrums: they’ve successfully implemented a data lake, but they haven’t realized any business impact from the technology; or they’re struggling to deploy their investment in artificial intelligence or analytics in way that tangibly impacts their operations. In our view, the first step is to define the right goals, and then use technology to accomplish them.

For example, prospective clients often ask if we can help them better predict customer churn. We can reliably predict who’s going to churn and when — even up to eight times more accurately than chance. But now that we know who’s going to churn, what do we do? How do we keep them from leaving? Simply predicting churn is very different from preventing it. You might find that a strong predictor of churn is a customer invoice dispute; but, by time your model catches this predictor, it’s too late to save the client. Similarly, you may find that a strong predictor of churn is the customer living in a country that’s entered a recession — but what action can you take with this information? Leaning in to complexity — the thousands of decisions that go into servicing a customer during their lifecycle — offers the greatest opportunity for value, and a source of sustainable competitive advantage. If you can use data to examine and optimize every customer touchpoint, from the customer service interactions and product marketing suggestions, to invoice disputes and more, you can take action before churn is even on the table.

Whether they’re consumer companies or heavy manufacturers, our clients’ businesses are becoming more complex every day. In our experience, the key to starting off strong is embracing this complexity. Our software manages complexity by integrating data and systems in a robust, repeatable, and secure way. We help organizations leverage the universe of decisions that their operators make every day to accomplish their goals.

Starting your journey

To fully harness the power of your data, you first need to unify it. Typically, we’ll have our clients start by targeting one specific decision and identifying the relevant data sources needed to make the decision. This involves breaking down interdepartmental silos, connecting to a variety of source systems, and making previously-hidden data queryable in a central place.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
At level 0, data is queryable in a central place, but it’s still pretty inaccessible to anyone without a data science background.

However, at this level, the data is still pretty inaccessible to anyone without a data science background, which makes it insufficient to actually begin solving the problems you’ve surfaced. Moreover, many institutions struggle with enabling access for non-technical users, as well as questionable data quality and perplexing data governance. This is the data lake we hear so much about — an important foundation, but essentially the base, not the capstone, of transformation. Without organizing the data around concepts that are accessible to the business, your data lake can very easily turn into a data swamp.

Leveling up
I. The data asset

So let’s keep building. A level one organization has turned its data lake into a usable data asset. The primary concern is making sure that everyone making key decisions has the data they need at their fingertips. Oftentimes, companies realize that as their data capture mechanisms improve, they suddenly have a tangle of data sources, rows, and columns that paralyze rather than enable their operations. The result is a layer of Excel workarounds that add unnecessary complication to a jumble of arcane datasets.

Once you focus on who’s making the decision, and what data they need to be most effective, you can start molding all this data into a common language — something we call an ontology. Instead of thinking of the data in rows and columns specific to each underlying database, an ontology allows you to interact with real world concepts like “customers” or “claims,” and the relationships between them. For example, at a major aircraft manufacturer, the “aircraft” object is at the center of everything. It requires integrating a multitude of different sources: production planning, parts and assemblies, quality events, design documents, flights, sensor data, maintenance history, and many more.

From here, you can leverage your organization’s subject matter knowledge to create 360˚ views, allowing your end users to more easily draw insights from the data. Having full visibility into all the relevant information about the core business immediately impacts decision making. For example, a station manager at an airplane manufacturing plant can make much faster decisions about what work to prioritize and what work to escalate because he knows precisely what’s left to be done to complete the aircraft.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
At level 1, 360˚ views enable end users to easily draw insights from their data.

However, despite the significant business value you see at level one, this first level only scratches the surface of the opportunity.

II. Guided decision making

Building on top of the data asset, it’s important to next create structured workflows that bridge the gap between massive amounts of data and impactful, data-driven decisions. At level two you make operational decisions from the data asset, connecting your high-level strategy to concrete, operational workflows that execute the strategy. This allows your organization to push through to a new paradigm: data-driven connection between strategy and execution. As you navigate this new terrain, you may find that there are still functional parts of your operations running asynchronously from your business strategy — that’s normal, and a reality for most of our clients. Identifying this misalignment is the first step to solving the problem.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

To illustrate this concept, let’s use the example of an engineer solving quality issues during a manufacturing process. Previously, she solved issues from scratch, relying on her own experience, trial and error, and phone calls to colleagues. She didn’t benefit from the vast combined knowledge built up by the organization across many plants and other quality engineers in the course of solving millions of quality points. This engineer, savvy as she is, is undoubtedly hindered in her ability to solve the issue.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Level 2 introduces guided workflows that dramatically accelerate the speed and reliability of users’ decisions.

With level two, she’s given a guided workflow that allows her to search for similar historical issues, confirm the relevant issues, and look up their successful resolution strategies. These capabilities dramatically accelerate the speed and reliability of her decision making. This level of data-driven decision making across the business goes a long way towards improving efficiency and performance. However, it isn’t sufficient for generating long-term sustainable or transformational business value.

Guided workflows only improve decisions on a micro level, and can decay rapidly as your business processes and challenges change over time. A quality engineer can develop rules-based strategies to identify issues, but any drastic changes — an updated manufacturing process or a new parts supplier, for example — will render her analysis obsolete.

III. Dynamic decision making

In order to counteract this decay, workflows must have the ability to adapt and improve over time. At level three you’re intentionally capturing the decisions you make with dedicated workflows, then modeling their greater impact on the business such that these workflows get smarter over time. The decisions you make with your data today become investments that will pay dividends tomorrow; and decisions are treated as data points to be analyzed and modeled for future understanding. For the first time, you’ll have a continuous view of whether the execution is aligned with your strategy, and, crucially, if your strategy is showing signs of success.

For example, our oil and gas partner created a digital twin of their real-world well network, allowing them to conduct “what-if” scenario analysis on their infrastructure without impacting the operational cadence of the wells themselves. They’re able to assess the impact on these flow decisions in terms of cost, timing, and more. Learnings from the last round of decisions makes each of the consecutive rounds better.

Similarly, at a major airline, flight control center operators are making routing decisions every second based on models showing the real-time, simulated impact of changes on the rest of the fleet, including connections, passenger delays, and aircraft availability. And just like the oil and gas partner, the airline can see the impact each decision has, learn from the results, and ameliorate the outcome of each successive round.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
At level 3, you can begin to understand whether execution aligns with your strategy — and whether your strategy is showing signs of success.
IV. Expanding the decision space

A level four organization has moved beyond optimizing local, individual decisions to connecting a global decision network. Decisions impact each other across the business — and in some cases, across the entire industry. Skywise, the Airbus and Palantir initiative to build an aviation industry data platform, demonstrates that the decision space need not be limited by the walls of one organization: it can include customers, suppliers, and other industry players that build a dynamic and reactive value chain.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Level 4 is where you optimize your organization’s decisions at a global level.

At level four, you’re understanding where one decision flows into a related decision; identifying the cross-organizational friction these decisions create; and building a digital twin of your entire organization, so you can see how departmental decisions affect every aspect of the business.

At this level, our oil and gas engineer is identifying the effects her decisions on individual wells had on other parts of the oil asset — decisions she made after analyzing the well infrastructure’s digital twin. However, our engineer can’t single-handedly optimize the entire business. Our software creates a network of individuals who all work from a single source of truth, allowing them to see the impact their decisions have on other contributors and understand the complex cost-benefit tradeoffs that exist at every major organization. At level four, our engineer’s colleagues in Finance and Global Projects can take the output of her optimizations and use them as data points to evaluate future investment decisions, work plans, and capital allocation plans. These all, in turn, become opportunities that are molded into the same digital twin.

V. Model-driven operations

At this level you’ve established that you’re learning about things that matter, and with data that can be trusted.

Now you can take your broad and deep organizational knowledge and let your models autonomously accelerate decision making. You’re no longer only creating value by supporting decision making, but also making automated decisions based on the data loops you’ve created. Because you’ve refined your models and trust their efficacy, you can connect them directly to your operational infrastructure, focusing human intervention on the most value-additive parts.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Level 5: You’ve refined your models and trust their efficacy — and now you can connect them directly to your operational infrastructure.

For instance, our airline partner could leverage their model to instantly decide to reroute an aircraft because the impact, which is now modeled across the value chain, is strictly positive. Human operators monitor the network and control the parameters, freeing the work force to intervene only when the impact merits their time and expertise.

Running at your own pace

As you can see from the examples we’ve shared, organizations are unlocking concrete results at every level; and climbing the levels at a steady pace means building a sustainable data-driven business.

Every complex organization is actively thinking about how to best leverage data to modernize and digitize their business, but very few have a quantitative way to measure their progress — both for their tech teams and their core business functions. As our clients enter new markets and verticals, adapt to a changing global economy, and navigate newly competitive landscapes, the levels framework helps them quantify progress while ensuring they stay accountable to their ultimate goals. Let’s make sure you keep winning — and whatever pace you choose, we’re here to coach and empower, ensuring you learn from our own missteps and successes along the way. Level up!

Authors

Jorien V., Matt B.