Ontology SDK • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Developer toolchain Ontology SDK Overview 

 Ontology SDK (OSDK)

The Ontology Software Development Kit (OSDK) allows you to access the full power of the Ontology directly from your development environment. The OSDK supports NPM (Node Package Manager) for TypeScript, Pip or Conda for Python, Maven for Java, and OpenAPI spec for any other language.

By treating Foundry as your backend, you can leverage the Ontology's robust ability to perform high-scale queries and Foundry writeback alongside granular governance controls to accelerate the process of securely developing applications that can power your organization.

To create and manage OSDK applications, use Developer Console . This section covers SDK-specific reference documentation.

 OSDK benefits

The OSDK was built to provide several primary benefits:

 Accelerated development: With the OSDK, you can quickly start developing applications backed by the Foundry Ontology. By enabling ergonomic access to Ontology APIs, the OSDK allows you to read and write back to the Ontology with minimal code.

 Strong type-safety: The functions and types generated for the OSDK are based on just the subset of the Ontology relevant to you. Types and functions are generated from your Ontology, allowing you to query and explore your Ontology directly in your editor.

 Centralized maintenance: As the Ontology is built and managed centrally in Foundry, you can focus on application building and decrease the typical maintenance burden required to build a data foundation.

 Secure by design: The OSDK uses a token that is scoped only to the ontological entities you want your application to access, in addition to the user's own permissions to the data.

Additionally, TypeScript bindings for frontend development provide a convenient way for developers to quickly build React applications on top of Foundry.

The generated code uses metadata about your Ontology, including property names and descriptions. You can view this metadata directly in your editor.

 Getting started

To build an application with the OSDK:

 Create a new application in Developer Console

Bootstrap your application using one of the language-specific guides:

 TypeScript 

 Python 

 Java 

Optionally, host your application on Foundry 

 SDK references

This section contains language-specific API reference documentation:

 Java OSDK 

 Python OSDK 

 TypeScript OSDK migration guide 

 Python OSDK migration guide 

 Generate OSDK for other languages 

 Related documentation

 Developer Console overview : Create and manage OSDK applications

 OSDK React applications : Build React applications with OSDK

 Development environment : Set up your development workflow

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Overview 

 NEXT Java OSDK 
 →