AIP Logic • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 AI Platform (AIP) AIP Logic Overview 

 AIP Logic

AIP Logic is a no-code development environment for building, testing, and releasing functions powered by LLMs. AIP Logic enables you to build feature-rich AI-powered functions that leverage the Ontology without the complexity typically introduced by development environments and API calls. Using Logic’s intuitive interface, application builders can engineer prompts, test, evaluate and monitor, set up automation, and more.

You can use AIP Logic to automate and support your critical tasks, whether connecting key information from unstructured inputs to your Ontology, resolving scheduling conflicts, optimizing asset performance by finding the best allocation, reacting to disruptions in your supply chain, or more.

Logic functions can also be automated so that Ontology edits can be automatically applied or staged for human review .

AIP Logic provides an intuitive interface to leverage the Ontology and LLMs via a Logic function that takes inputs (like Ontology objects or text strings) and can return an output (objects and/or strings) or make edits to the Ontology. For example, the LLM-powered function below takes input data from an Ontology object and cross-references that data with a customer email to recommend a solution for a given issue based on previous resolutions.

AIP Logic is built on the same rigorous security model that governs the rest of the Palantir platform, including user and function permissions . These platform security controls grant an LLM access only to what is necessary to complete a task.

Learn more about the core concepts of AIP Logic or get started with building a Logic function.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS AIP Evals / View results in metrics dashboard 

 NEXT Core concepts 
 →