Shared security responsibility model • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Security & governance Shared security responsibility model 

 Shared security responsibility model

Security on Foundry is a shared responsibility between Palantir and Palantir’s customers. While Palantir is responsible for Foundry’s security at each level of the service in our control, customers also play a vital role in ensuring their data is protected.

The shared responsibility model is a framework that has been adopted by many major cloud-based software companies to delineate security responsibility between the customer and the cloud provider. As the cloud provider, Palantir is responsible for security of the cloud, while customers are responsible for security in the cloud.

In practice, this means that Palantir and underlying Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) providers are responsible for securing Foundry by managing physical security, host infrastructure, networking controls, and application security. Meanwhile, customers maintain responsibility over what they choose to host in Foundry: specifically, customer data and user identity/access configuration. The shared responsibility model gives customers control over their data, how they use it, and who can access it, and relieves customers from worry about the security of the underlying infrastructure.

The shared responsibility model can be broken down into the responsibilities of two parties:

 Palantir ↘ Customer ↘ 

 Foundry Services Customer Data 

 Encryption in transit and at rest Customer-built Applications 

 Network Traffic Protections Identity and Access Management (IAM) 

 Operating System, Network, and Firewall Configurations Resource Permissions (RBAC) 

 Infrastructure-level Monitoring and Alerting Application-level Monitoring and Alerting 

 Continuous Delivery, Automated Upgrades, and Patching 

 Foundation Services:
→ Compute
→ Storage
→ Database
→ Networking 

 Global Infrastructure:
→ Regions
→ Availability Zones 

As a customer, some of your responsibilities for protecting your data may vary by environment and architecture, but you are always responsible for the following:

Managing access and identity for your users via single sign-on (SSO) . This includes enforcing multi-factor authentication. If you do not have a single sign-on provider, we may be able to provide one for you.

Ensuring any data uploaded to the environment is appropriate and meets your own policies and obligations.

Ensuring your users apply appropriate discretionary access controls (roles) and mandatory access controls (markings) .

Monitoring application-level security audit logs to ensure usage of your platform by your users is appropriate and meets your own policies and obligations.

Contact your Palantir representative if you have any questions or concerns regarding the shared responsibility model.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Overview 

 NEXT Security glossary 
 →