Understanding ROI with Palantir Foundry
Palantir
Follow
5 min read
·
Jun 20, 2022

34

Press enter or click to view image in full size

These days, it’s nearly impossible to imagine a road trip without a mobile phone and navigation app. While printing out a guidance route or referring to a paper map seems so archaic to us today, we forget that these error-prone methods were the only options we had just a few years ago. How did we know when we’d get to our destination without knowing the traffic conditions lying ahead? What did we do when we took a wrong turn, or when the roads themselves had changed in the time since our map on hand was printed?

In many ways, many companies today still use the equivalent of paper maps for navigating their financial and human resources. At Palantir, we’ve built the next-generation navigation platform for our finances, helping our people understand where they are today and see what lies ahead.

For many leaders, the process of understanding where their companies are investing and how those investments are faring involves weeks of work from internal teams and outside consultants, due to siloed, sensitive data and fragmented organisational views. The data likely live in different systems altogether, and may include sensitive information that must be handled carefully or only for certain purpose. The best version of the resultant output is an accurate picture of a company’s state when the process started. The faster a company grows and the surrounding world changes, the more outdated the decisions made from this picture are.

To avoid unpleasant surprises when it comes time to report, whether at the end of a quarter to shareholders or to ad-hoc investor meetings, many companies must resort to implementing hurdles designed to avoid spending outside of a rigid top-down structure. While this helps limit damage in some realms, it may inhibit organizations’ abilities to respond to change and even take advantage of investment opportunities.

This is a technology problem.

Why is getting a real-time view of your expenses and revenue hard?

Let’s extend the metaphor just a little further. To help you traverse the physical world, your mobile phone’s navigation app needs to integrate data from a variety of sources ranging from GPS satellites orbiting earth to traffic information gathered from myriad databases. The task of compiling a real-time-view of your company’s operational picture and comprehensive ROI involves a similar set of challenges:

Data is spread across databases that don’t talk to each other. From financial reporting tools, such as expense and billing management tools, to more task-specific tools like Google Ads or AWS billing, financial data and corresponding understanding of ROI are dispersed across systems. In order to understand a project’s performance, expenses must be married to other metrics, which likely live in different systems altogether: e.g. travel, payroll, and revenue data.
The standard organisational view is fragmented. Each of the above-mentioned tools comes with its own, distinct data model, and sits at a unique vantage point within the organisation. The view from that vantage point does not often provide a holistic picture of how the overall organisation wants or needs to operate. This impedance mismatch can force the organisation to alter its structure towards one dictated by those tools, just so that the data provided will make sense. This can make it difficult to change organisational structures as needed, because the barrier to changing the corresponding external financial systems is too high.
Financial data is often an organisation’s most sensitive data. Ensuring accuracy and appropriate access to financial data poses a delicate technological challenge where a mistake can have market-moving implications. The effort and complexity involved with disseminating this information can be a significant limiting factor to the organisation’s ability to diffuse decision-making across all areas of the business. This can lead to organisations centralising command, which is often counter-productive to business outcomes.
Lack of coverage from existing tooling. Of course, the existing tooling and corresponding procedures were adopted for good reasons — they solve specific pain points for employees, finance, and increased management’s visibility into operations. And there are surely more opaque areas where the organisation would like tools that provide incremental visibility. Without a technological solution to those additional areas, decisions and transactions will be recorded in static form across spreadsheets and emails.
How can Foundry provide a better solution?

At Palantir, we faced all of the challenges described above — and more! But by wielding Palantir Foundry, we were able to tackle them directly and sustainably.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

Foundry gives Palantir’s leaders across the business a real-time view of their projects’ ROI. Leaders are able to make independent and informed decisions based on a truly up-to-date view of the business. These decisions are then fed back via the common operating picture with minimal friction, enabling meaningful and relevant course-setting at all levels.

When we kicked off these efforts, we had much of the necessary data in our internal Foundry instance, as it was used to drive other use cases. As our companywide operations evolved in size and complexity, Palantir incorporated new tools to meet the need. We then used Foundry’s out-of-the-box data connectors to connect these tools bidirectionally to Foundry. We integrated procurement and credit card data to get a real time view of expenses and added extra dimensions to this spend from other systems such as our recruiting platforms, marketing systems, and CRM software, giving us a comprehensive attribution to every dollar that is spent.

With the benefit of an existing digital twin, we continued to expand this picture, integrating financial data into the way Palantir understands our business and enriching our existing structures and ontology with a financial dimension. This financial digital twin can be changed with little to no code, wherein the tools and dashboards built on this digital twin automatically update to reflect the evolving reality. We can rapidly test and adopt new tools, or even build our own with minimal investment when the market doesn’t quite have tools that meet our requirements. These real-time updates and ability to customise our solution enable Palantir to track and asses new organisational units and go-to-market strategies.

In addition to the business advantage provided by Foundry’s digital twin, the platform’s data lineage and change management tools can help simplify auditing changes and monitoring data health. Multi-modal, granular security primitives make it possible to disseminate the right information only to the people who should be viewing that data. At Palantir, C-level leadership and on-the-ground project leads can use Foundry as the single pane of glass through which to view and assess financial and operational data, while appropriate access levels are enforced automatically.

One of the most important advantages provided by business management in Foundry is that everyone can both see and agree on the validity of the data in front of them. This allows leaders to skip the step of validating and agreeing on numbers, and to instead focus on meaningful decision-making across the company. It also permits Palantir to practice distributive authority, as leaders at any level can see and understand the operational picture at a moment’s notice.

By using Foundry as Palantir’s internal operating system we, not our tools, are in control of our organisational structures and operational future.

To schedule a demo of these capabilities or simply learn more, get in touch.

Authors

MC Bousquette: Operational Lead

Roi Nir: Technical Team Lead