Inside DevOps: Staying compliant, staying productive
Palantir
Follow
6 min read
·
May 23, 2019

181

Growing companies often face a tradeoff between speed and compliance, forced to choose between moving fast and breaking things, to use Mark Zuckerberg’s now-infamous mantra, or following rules and policies so closely they fall behind competitors willing to take on more risk. We think about this tradeoff a lot at Palantir because our business model depends on defying it; we’ve built our reputation delivering transformational change at the world’s most important institutions, where neither speed nor compliance are negotiable.

One of the responsibilities of Palantir’s DevOps organization is to help avoid this tradeoff. We take pride in reducing friction and removing inefficiency, building tools that turn the toil of ticking checkboxes into processes that are compliant by design and enhance the engineering flow. To this end, we recently developed and open-sourced two GitHub Apps that are critical to our workflows: Policy Bot and Bulldozer. The rest of this post will explore our motivation for building these tools and how they work.

Policy Bot

One of the basic requirements of any compliance regime is that changes, whether to software or to infrastructure, are reviewed before moving to production. Since Palantir follows infrastructure-as-code practices, this review almost always takes the form of a code review. Requiring code reviews sounds like a simple problem, but as we surveyed development teams with different workflows, the requirements became more nuanced. For example:

Changes targeting specific branches, like a staging branch, do not require review.
Certain types of changes may need additional approval from our Information Security or Legal teams.
Certain types of changes, like to documentation, are pre-approved and do not need review.
When configuration for multiple environments is centralized in a single repository, developers should be able to change their respective environments (identified for instance by sub folders within the repository) with peer approval, without blocking on approval from a DevOps team member.

Failure to automate any of these conditions can break developers out of their flow, forcing them to seek out and interrupt others for approval and needlessly delaying changes. When teams are geographically distributed or busy with other work, it could take days to get a change merged.

Because we use GitHub for source control, the first candidate solution was GitHub’s required reviews feature. Unfortunately, we quickly found this too limiting: reviews cannot be conditional on the files or branches changed, all users with write access can leave pull request reviews that approve the changes, and there were no extension points as our requirements evolved. Building our own approval tool that integrates with GitHub seemed like the best option, which led to Policy Bot.

Policy Bot defines approval conditions by combining multiple rules with logical and/or operators. Each rule has predicates that determine when it applies. For instance, the following policy approves a pull request if a member of the DevOps team approves or if the pull request only changes test files:

policy:
  approval:
    - or:
      - devops team approves
      - only changes test files
approval_rules:
  - name: devops team approves
    requires:
      count: 1
      teams: ["palantir/devops"]
  - name: only changes test files
    if:
      only_changed_files:
        paths: ["test/.*"]

Other supported predicates allow users to express rules concerning the author of the pull request, the target branch, and the contributors.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

Policies are defined in a YAML file in each repository, making them subject to the same approval conditions as regular code. While policies are designed to be human-readable, understanding the state of each rule for a certain pull request can be challenging. That’s why Policy Bot also provides a UI showing the status of all rules:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Policy Bot has seen significant adoption with both product and infrastructure teams. We empirically found the requirement for complex approval rules to be well-founded: the median project uses five rules — already more than GitHub supports natively — while one of the most complicated configuration repositories uses over a hundred rules.

Bulldozer

With Policy Bot offering the granular approval conditions we required, we soon faced another problem: developers that submitted approved changes could not merge their own pull requests because they did not have write permission. This eliminated many of the gains in self-service that Policy Bot enabled, blocking progress until a DevOps engineer could perform the merge. Unfortunately, GitHub’s write permission is very coarse, so it was not acceptable to give all users write access to these otherwise sensitive repositories just so they could merge their approved changes.

We realized that because Policy Bot provides a required approval check and our CI system provides a required check for tests, it was safe to automatically merge pull requests when all required checks had passed. We built Bulldozer to enable this. Like Policy Bot, Bulldozer is configured by a YAML file in each repository, specifying the conditions under which the pull request can merge. In addition to all required status check passing, users may choose to only auto-merge pull requests with specific labels or comments. They can also choose to block automatic merges with those labels or comments instead.

With Bulldozer in place, users could now fully self-service their pre-approved and peer-approved changes without blocking on the DevOps team and without reducing the security of the repository. We also found automatic merges to be beneficial in other situations. Developers could now have their approved pull requests merge as soon as the potentially lengthy integration tests complete, without context switching back to a previous task just to click the merge button. With our global development teams, Bulldozer also reduces the time between approval and merge when the developers and reviewers are in different time zones, leading to fewer merge conflicts and faster iteration.

But with the foundations of Policy Bot and Bulldozer, we soon saw an opportunity for even greater automation.

Automated maintenance

Once we automated the process of approving and merging manual changes, we had a new challenge: could we automate the creation of changes too? To experiment with this, we created Excavator, a service that runs arbitrary scripts against thousands of repositories and creates pull requests with any changes produced by the script, in the same spirit as tools like Dependabot and Microplane. (We started work on Excavator back in 2016, so it seems that the need for multi-repo management tools emerged in different places at roughly the same time; also check out Google’s Refaster and Netflix’s Rewrite if you are interested in this area.) This has allowed us to automate dependency upgrades, refactors, build configuration, and other common maintenance tasks across our projects. When combined with Policy Bot and Bulldozer, changes Excavator creates to certain files are automatically approved and merged (if the build passes) with no human intervention! Many of our stable projects effectively maintain themselves now, keeping up to date with the latest security patches and other best practices.

Conclusion

Facing a huge problem like “make development compliant, but not slower” can seem daunting and can tempt teams to reinvent the world, assuming their current tools aren’t up to the task. But we found through Policy Bot and Bulldozer that often only minor adjustments are needed to remove big barriers to productivity. Users can continue to use tools they are familiar with and the DevOps teams can focus on actual problems instead of rebuilding existing functionality. If these adjustments are focused on specific, well-defined problems, they often go on to compound on each other, leading to even bigger improvements over time. And should our requirements change, we can easily replace or extend the bots in our ecosystem.

As Palantir continues to grow, we’ll no doubt continue to confront a tension between speed and compliance, in no small part because working with some of the world’s most important institutions means strict compliance is nonnegotiable. But Palantir was founded on the idea that tradeoffs between security and efficiency are often false dichotomies, and I’m proud to be a part of a team that works every day to push us closer toward that future.

Candidates interested in joining the DevOps team can apply via the relevant office posting:

New York
Washington DC
Palo Alto
Seattle
Author

Billy K.