Third-party applications • Writing OAuth2 clients for Foundry • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Security & governance Third-party applications Writing OAuth2 clients for Foundry 

 Writing OAuth2 clients for Foundry

This documentation is intended for Foundry users or administrators who wish to write OAuth2 clients to connect to Foundry. This page provides a description of the OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework ↗ and details about Foundry’s implementation of OAuth2. Additionally, the Foundry Third-Party Application & API Agreement governs the use of third-party applications on the Foundry platform and should be understood by creators and administrators of third-party applications.

 OAuth2 overview

The OAuth2 authorization framework enables third-party applications to obtain controlled access to a service. OAuth2 improves on the traditional client-server authorization model by providing a layer that enables clients (like a third-party application) to request access through the use of a specifically-issued access tokens and refresh tokens, rather than a user’s credentials or static bearer tokens. OAuth2 manages this access through the use of grants, which are methods of obtaining access tokens.

 Supporting OAuth2 integration

The following sections describe how to support OAuth2 in a third-party application. Throughout the document, client refers to the third-party application, authorization server refers to Foundry’s authorization server, and user refers to the end-user of the third-party application.

To use OAuth2 with Foundry, you must register your application by following the Registering Third-Party Applications instructions and choose one of the authorization options in the next sub-sections.

 Authorization code grant

The authorization code grant allows the client to act on behalf of existing Foundry users. The application must request the set of Foundry permissions they need access to, then a Foundry user must explicitly grant the client access to those permissions on their account. Foundry allows the client to be restricted to a limited set of resources, or to all the resources a user can access.

The authorization code grant works as follows:

The client creates a code_verifier and code_challenge . This is recommended but not required for confidential clients ↗ , such as server-based applications, that can safely store a client secret. It is required for public clients ↗ , such as native apps, that cannot safely store a client secret.

The code_verifier is a cryptographically random string that contains A-Z, a-z, 0-9, - (hyphen), . (period), _ (underscore), and ~ (tilde), and is 43 to 128 characters long.

The code_challenge is derived by performing the SHA256 of the code_verifier and then converting that to a Base64-URL-encoded value without padding.

The client application should open a browser and send the user to the authorization endpoint URL with the following parameters added as query parameters:

 response_type : This should be set to code .

 client_id : This should be set to the ID generated when the third-party application was registered in Foundry.

 redirect_uri : This tells the authorization server where to redirect the user after the user approves the request. If not specified, it will default to the first redirect URI value in the Third-Party application setting in Foundry.

 scope : This defines the permissions requested. Scopes for public APIs are in the API documentation . Add the offline_access scope to get a refresh token. If you want multiple scopes, concatenate the scopes using a space as a delimiter.

 state : This is a random string generated by the application that will be passed back to the application as is. The application should check that the value returned matches the original string to prevent CSRF attacks.

 code_challenge : If the client created a code_challenge , it should populate this parameter. The authorization server will internally associate the code_challenge parameter with the authorization code it generates.

 code_challenge_method : This should be set to S256 .

When the user visits the URL, the authorization server presents the user with a prompt similar to the following and the user then can choose to approves the app’s request.

If the request is successful, the authorization server then redirects the user to the redirect URI that was specified along with the following parameters added as query parameters:

 code : This is the authorization code that the authorization server generates.

 state : This is the same parameter the client passed in the authorization request. The client should check that it matches the original state parameter that was sent in the request.

The client should then exchange the authorization code for an access token by calling the token endpoint . The following parameters should be sent using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded format in the request body:

 grant_type : This should be set to authorization_code .

 code : The code that was received from the authorization server.

 redirect_uri : The absolute URI that the user agent will be redirected to.

 client_id : This should be set to the ID generated when the third-party application was registered in Foundry.

 code_verifier : If the client generated a code_verifier , it should send it in this request. The authorization server will verify that the code_verifier matches the code_challenge that was sent in the previous request.

The authorization server then responds with an access token which can then be used by the client to access the requested resources such as REST APIs. The response contains the following parameters:

 access_token : The token that can be used by the client to access the requested resources.

 token_type : The type of the token that was issued.

 expires_in : The lifetime in seconds of the access token.

 refresh_token : This is returned only if the requested scope included offline_access . This should be used if the client wants to refresh the access token without the user being present to authorize the request. For more information, see Refreshing an access token .

 Client credentials grant

The client credentials grant is designed for non-interactive service-user style workflows where actions the client makes are not associated to normal Foundry users. The client does not act on behalf of normal Foundry users.

Instead, this grant type automatically creates a Foundry service user associated with the client that can then be granted permissions to access Foundry resources. The token obtained by this grant can be used to access resources on behalf of the created service user. The username of the service user account is the same as the client ID of the application.

By default, the service account does not have access to any resources. A Foundry administrator must assign the desired roles and permissions to the service user account for the client to perform actions in Foundry.

The client credentials grant works as follows:

The client calls the token endpoint . The following parameters should be sent using the application/x-www-form-urlencoded format in the request body:

 grant_type : This should be set to client_credentials .

 client_id : This should be set to the ID generated when the third-party application was registered in Foundry.

 client_secret : This should be set to the client secret that was generated when the third-party application was registered in Foundry.

The authorization server then responds back with the following:

 access_token : The token that can be used by the client to access the requested resources.

 token_type : The type of the token that was issued.

 expires_in : The lifetime in seconds of the access token.

The client can then use the access token to access the requested resources.

 Refreshing an access token

Access tokens expire after some time and will need to be obtained again. Any client that needs access to the Foundry API when the user is not present will need to refresh the token.

This can be done by following these steps:

The client should follow the steps outlined in Authorization Code Grant and specify offline_access as part of the requested scope parameter.

The client should save the returned refresh_token that was returned in the final step of Authorization Code Grant .

If the access token expires, the client can then refresh the token by calling the token endpoint endpoint using the following parameters:

 grant_type : This should be set to refresh_token .

 refresh_token : The access token that was obtained previously for the given user.

 client_id : This should be set to the ID generated when the third-party application was registered in Foundry.

 client_secret : This should be set to the client secret that was generated when the third-party application was registered in Foundry.

The authorization server will then respond with the following:

 access_token The token that can be used by the client to access the requested resources.

 token_type : The type of the token that was issued.

 expires_in : The lifetime in seconds of the access token.

 refresh_token : The refresh token that can be used to refresh the access token. Note that Foundry rotates the refresh token each time the previously issued refresh token is used. Make sure you save both the access_token and the refresh_token .

 Refresh token rotation

Refresh tokens can be used to obtain new access tokens. Foundry reduces the risk associated with refresh tokens by rotating the refresh tokens each time the previously issued refresh token is used.
A reuse detection protection mechanism ensures that if a refresh token is reused after one minute of its initial use, all access tokens created from this grant are invalidated and a new authorization flow is required.
A one minute interval of reuse is allowed to account for possible transient errors like network failures. Additionally, inactive refresh tokens over 30 days old are automatically invalidated. These safeguards reduce risk from potentially compromised tokens by ensuring there are no long-lived refresh tokens.

 OAuth2 API reference

The following endpoints can be used to obtain OAuth2 tokens.

 Authorization endpoint

 GET /multipass/api/oauth2/authorize 

The authorization endpoint, used by the client to obtain an authorization code.

 Query parameters

 Parameter name Type Description 

 response_type String This must be set to code . 

 client_id String The unique identifier of the client. 

 redirect_uri String The absolute URI that the user agent will be redirected to. This must match one of the Redirect URIs that was specified in the Control Panel. You can access this URI again by navigating to the Manage Application screen. 

 scope String The scope of the permissions to be requested. Scopes for public APIs are in the API documentation and should be listed as a space-separated string. 

 state String (optional) An arbitrary string passed to the server that gets passed back to the client as is. This helps prevent cross-site request forgery. 

 code_challenge String (optional) The code challenge generated by the client; used with Authorization Code Grant with Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE) 

 code_challenge_method String (optional) This should be set S256 if code_challenge is used. 

 Redirect query parameters

If the request is successful, the user’s browser is redirected to the redirect URI specified in the Third-Party application settings or in the redirect URI passed in the request. The following query parameters will be present in the redirect request URI:

 Parameter name Type Description 

 code String The authorization code that was generated. This code will expire after 10 minutes. 

 state String (optional) If the state parameter was present in the authorization request, this will contain that exact value. 

 Token endpoint

 POST /multipass/api/oauth2/token 

The token endpoint is used by the client to obtain an access token by presenting its authorization grant or refresh token.

 Header parameters

 Parameter name Description 

 Content-Type Must be application/x-www-form-urlencoded . 

 Request body parameters

 Parameter name Type Description 

 grant_type String Value must be authorization_code , refresh_token , or client_credentials 

 code String (optional) The authorization code received from the authorization endpoint. This is required if the grant type is authorization_code 

 refresh_token String (optional) This is required when grant_type is refresh_token . The value should be the refresh_token that was obtained in the original request when the authorization code was obtained. 

 redirect_uri String (optional/required) The absolute URI that the user agent will be redirected to. This is required if a redirect URI was specified in the Authorization Request. 

 scope String (optional) The scope of the permissions to be requested. Scopes for public APIs are in the API documentation and should be listed as a space-separated string. 

 client_id String The unique identifier of the client. 

 client_secret String (optional) The application's client secret that was issued during application registration. This is required when grant_type is client_credentials . 

 code_verifier String (optional) The code verifier used for the PKCE request that the application generated before the authorization request. 

 Response body

The response JSON has the following fields.

 Field name type Description 

 access_token String The credentials used to access resources. 

 token_type String The type of the token issued. 

 expires_in String The lifetime in seconds of the access token. 

 refresh_token String (optional) The credentials used to obtain new access tokens. Foundry rotates refresh_token every time a refresh_token grant is called. Make sure you save both the access_token and the refresh_token . 

 Endpoint errors

 Error response body

If the request fails, the user’s browser will only be redirected if the access request is denied. In all other cases, an HTML error page is returned which includes the fields below.

 Field name Type Description 

 error String The error code as defined in the next section. 

 error_description String The human-readable description of the error 

 Error codes

 Error code value Description 

 invalid_request The request was invalid. 

 unauthorized_client The client is not authorized to request an authorization code. 

 access_denied The sever denied the request. 

 unsupported_response_type The provided response type is not supported. 

 invalid_scope The requested scope is invalid, unknown, or malformed 

 server_error There was an unexpected server error. 

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Danger zone actions 

 NEXT User-generated tokens 
 →