Top highlight

From Human-Defined to Software-Defined Data Integration — Part I
Palantir
Follow
3 min read
·
Oct 12, 2021

71

Editor’s note: This is the first in a four-part series of posts exploring the origins, capabilities and impact of Palantir’s Software-Defined Data Integration. Stay tuned for parts two, three and four.

At Palantir, we’ve spent the better part of two decades tackling some of the world’s most formidable data integration challenges alongside our customers — from digitizing the electrical grid to fighting child exploitation and pursuing information dominance.

Time and again, we’ve experienced firsthand the frustration of business decision-makers and IT departments alike at trying to find, surface, and operationalize the right data to solve a pressing business problem. Questions that seem only logical and straightforward (i.e. “how much less does it cost to manufacture Product X vs. Product Y?” or “how long does it usually take for Product Z to arrive from our suppliers?”) prompt weeks, months or even years of technical road-blocks and data wrangling.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Of course, we’ve evolved our software products to alleviate much of this pain and time drain. However, until recently, the bulk of data integration work remained ‘human-defined’. Whether written by a forward-deployed Palantir engineer or a resident data scientist at one of our partners, data was integrated based on code written by a human. This manual data integration was not only error-prone and time-consuming, but it presented a significant maintenance overhead, as the structure of the data inevitably changes over time.

Instead of continuing to spend precious time and resources doing the same work over and over, we decided to take a new approach.

“Necessity is the mother of invention.”

We had already started working on a way of automating away the manual work of building data pipelines in 2019. Then, in early 2020, the pandemic hit and the world changed in an instant. Organizations needed to know, immediately, how COVID-19 impacted their workforce, their supply chain, their customers, and their finances. They didn’t have the luxury of weeks- or months-long data integration projects to find the answers. These questions were existential.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

We set to work, rapidly deploying our fledgling integration solution at customers, existing and new, observing what worked and what didn’t, and refining our approach in real time.

We soon realized that our solution to automatically extract, transform and harmonize data from across existing systems could massively reduce the time and effort spent comprehending complex data landscapes. In some cases, we could do in hours what had previously taken months — a valuable upgrade even outside of the crisis we were helping to combat. In the midst of it all, the term “software-defined data integration” took hold for our solution and a set of guiding philosophies crystallized.

Guiding Philosophies

Integrate data from first principles: the richest and most flexible downstream applications of data integration rely on starting from the most granular source data. Using preprocessed data may feel like a shortcut, but doing so immediately narrows the scope of problems that could be addressed in the future.
Automate as much as possible: metadata is as valuable as the data itself — it can power dynamic data pipeline generation, slashing the overheads of manual data integration now and in the future. A data pipeline, albeit one written by hand, is a form of automation; in dynamically generating that pipeline, you are automating your automation.
Build a highly extensible knowledge framework: not everything can be automated, but learnings encoded as product will compound over time. Make it easy both to contribute knowledge and to review those contributions so as to maintain a high bar for quality.
Close the operational loop: a first-class method for writing back to source systems ensures data-driven decisions result in concrete actions. So often, data only flows in one direction, but in a world that has moved from monolithic platforms to multi-system interoperability, bi-directionality is key.

Over the course of this blog series, we will expand on what we have learnt on this journey and how it has empowered our customers to do more with their data.

Looking to learn more about SDDI? Download the new whitepaper.