AIP Evals • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 AI Platform (AIP) AIP Evals Overview 

 AIP Evals

AIP Evals is a testing environment to evaluate the performance of your AIP Logic functions , AIP Agent functions , or code-authored functions . It is specifically designed to help you deal with the non-deterministic nature of LLMs. AIP Evals allows you to create test cases, define evaluation functions to measure performance, and compare the results against previous versions of your function. It enables you to build the necessary confidence to put LLM-backed functions into production or make changes to an existing implementation.

You can use AIP Evals to:

Create test cases and define evaluation criteria.

Debug, iterate, and improve functions and prompts.

Compare the performance of different models on your functions.

Examine variance across multiple runs.

 Core concepts

 Evaluation suite: The collection of test cases, target functions, and evaluation functions used to benchmark function performance.

 Target function: The function being evaluated. A suite can be configured to test multiple target functions simultaneously.

 Evaluation function: The method used when comparing or evaluating the actual output of a target function against the expected output.

 Test cases: Defined sets of inputs and expected outputs that are passed into evaluation functions during evaluation suite runs.

 Metrics: The results of evaluation functions. Metrics are produced per test case and can be compared in aggregate or individually between runs.

To get started, create an evaluation suite for logic functions , or create an evaluation suite for general functions , and learn more about evaluation run configurations .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS AI FDE / Best practices 

 NEXT Evaluation suites for Logic functions 
 →