Our Recommendations to the NSCAI
Palantir
Follow
9 min read
·
Mar 3, 2021

136

Press enter or click to view image in full size

At Palantir, we pride ourselves on providing the digital infrastructure for data-driven operations and decision making for some of the most important institutions in the world. As part of their data transformation journey, many of these organizations are successfully integrating AI/ML using our software.

Foremost, our software establishes a reliable data foundation. More advanced data science approaches, including AI/ML, can be responsibly and effectively incorporated upon this foundation by enabling critical functionality like continuous model evaluation and validation, capturing of end user feedback to drive further improvements, and appropriate contextualization of AI/ML.

We call this framework operational AI because it enables deploying AI as part of an actual decision process in an operational context rather than developing it in an R&D lab environment. The operational AI approach recognizes that AI/ML is not a magical turnkey solution: Real, operational solutions depend upon contextually-appropriate AI/ML model use, engagement with end users, sound data science methods, rigorous testing and review processes, and trustworthy infrastructure. As a critical part of the AI supply chain, we are cognizant and attentive to both the powerful capabilities that AI technology can enable, but also the need for AI systems to operate and be applied responsibly, in ethically and procedurally defensible and accountable ways.

We have partnered with organizations — including the U.S. Government, large commercial businesses, and AI model vendors — to operationalize AI in consequential environments from biotech labs and oil platforms to the battlefield. Along the way, we have learned a lot from our partners, our customers, and the challenges we’ve encountered.

Why we wrote this article

In September 2020, the U.S. National Security Commission for Artificial Intelligence (NSCAI) released a public request for comments on how the U.S. Government could better work with small and medium-sized commercial AI firms. While Palantir is not an AI company in strict terms, we work closely with AI vendors to safely and responsibly deploy their solutions to support the U.S. Government (Palantir’s software integrates and manages data and models). In that vein, we put our heads together with six other industry-leading firms that focus on various aspects of data and AI infrastructure to share the challenges that we have encountered and to identify ideas and proposals for possible solutions. With the NSCAI having now released their final report, we wanted to share our insights more broadly to contribute to the conversation around the NSCAI’s final recommendations and approaches to implementing those recommendations.

While Palantir, Clarifai, CrowdAI, Lilt, Maxar, Pilot AI, and Primer all support different components of the operational AI lifecycle, we share experience with the recurring challenges in implementing reliable and effective AI. We collated our diverse perspectives to highlight some common obstacles and propose solutions. What follows is a distillation of the comments we jointly submitted to the NSCAI. While many of these insights reflect our respective experiences working with the U.S. Government, they almost certainly apply to other large organizations.

AI/ML development and deployment challenges

In our collective experience, many challenges come down to the process of operationalizing AI — taking an algorithm that works well on a training data set, and making it actually useful and safe in the real world. Specific to the U.S. Government is the challenge of aligning AI/ML operationalization with existing program and procurement cycles, as well as the various U.S. national security organizations’ structures, business processes, and cultures.

Challenge: Effective implementation of AI/ML is an iterative process, but organizations may not expect it to be.

AI has to evolve over time to handle changing conditions: Customers often expect commercial AI/ML to be delivered in a fixed form, but it is rarely deployable as such out of the box, particularly when applied to unique government datasets and in settings with significant, life-altering impacts. That’s because these models actually need to be tuned with context-specific data and refined through direct user feedback in real-world scenarios. This requires consistent access to end users and a collaborative framework connecting those users to the model developers.

One of our lessons learned from our operational defense work is that AI model development and initial deployment is only the first step in a longer — and arguably unending — process. Models are brittle, while the world around us (including real-life use cases for the models, and the corresponding data) are continuously changing. Models break down when they are not updated and refined to reflect these changes. Continuous refinement requires an end-to-end infrastructure that supports model deployment, testing and evaluation, ongoing monitoring, and capture of user feedback — but customers are often focused on simply the AI model itself, and do not recognize or prepare for the iterative process.

Challenge: AI/ML algorithms cannot be tuned without representative data that is appropriately acquired and labeled, but often governmental organizations do not already have such data.

In our work with AI vendors that develop and deploy AI/ML models, we have seen firsthand that accurate, representative, and legitimately collected data (and consistent access to evolving data) are critical for training models that deliver safe and reliable outcomes for any end use cases. Without a robust, well-curated training dataset that can transfer from a lab environment to the real world, AI/ML models are susceptible to inaccurate predictions and bias. Other issues can include privacy and data protection concerns — all of which decrease the quality of models to which users have access, ultimately diminishing user confidence in the models and leading to unsafe outcomes.

Besides labeled data, AI vendors need the right data that has been acquired under appropriate conditions for the use case. AI can impact operational streams from sensor through decision making. Thus, it’s critical for organizations to think about collecting representative data at the correct point in the operational cycle. In some cases, this means collecting data and running inference higher upstream — on or near the actual sensors — rather than on downstream outputs.

Challenge: AI/ML is only effective when deployed against an appropriate problem area or task, yet some customers pursue AI first and then seek out a use case.

AI works best when it is considered holistically and is grounded in advancing specific mission objectives, rather than being introduced as techno-solutionism in search of a problem. In some cases, poor problem selection or outsized organizational expectations for AI lead to disappointment that sets back an organization’s appetite for AI development and adoption. Additionally, we have observed how organizations that implement AI successfully typically also implement organizational structure and business process changes that complement the AI/ML solution and enable it to be more effective.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

Challenge: Training algorithms on classified or sensitive data often challenges model developers’ access, slowing AI/ML deployment, and unclassified training sets are often not available.

Many hurdles exist to get AI/ML models running in classified or sensitive environments. Gaining access to classified systems or facilities represents an acute challenge to small firms. At the same time, the process for national security organizations to downdraft or sanitize non-sensitive training data so that vendors can see model performance is often slow and can introduce errors in the data. Collectively, we have experienced shortfalls in policy, guidance, and culture where governmental organizations have been reluctant to downdraft non-sensitive or demonstrably low-risk training data for model training in an unclassified environment. While emerging zero-shot approaches could eventually mitigate some of these challenges, in the near- to mid-term we expect the reliance upon downdrafted or sanitized non-sensitive data for AI/ML model development to remain. Two approaches that we see advancing vendors’ ability to build and refine their models are (1) Expanding AI vendor access to classified facilities when appropriate; and (2) Developing updated policies and training on appropriate mechanisms to downdraft non-sensitive training data.

Challenge: Organizations may want to procure AI capabilities before understanding the entire infrastructure and process required to successfully and responsibly deploy AI.

AI development is not just about building AI models; it is about building a system to make those models effective, useful, and accountable. Organizations should consider the path to take models into production with a view towards the full set of deployment considerations, including ethical frameworks, practical constraints, and usability standards. Such a program requires an end-to-end operational data platform, training data, compute resources, access to end users, a testing and evaluation infrastructure, accountability, and oversight measures — among other considerations. An effective AI program will implement AI models after these other critical components are in place.

Challenge: Developing productive human-AI/ML teaming requires limiting algorithmic bias, yet this is often not prioritized or only narrowly considered.

At its core, effective human-machine teaming requires trust. One significant component of that trust is transparency into how AI/ML models could reflect bias or drift over time. Government organizations seeking to deploy AI/ML algorithms can best limit bias by being involved as a partner in all stages of AI/ML product development, to include the following:

Unclassified AI/ML product development: Most AI/ML development occurs in commercial, unclassified/non-sensitive settings, and government organizations should endeavor to work with vendors in these environments early and often to set expectations around transparency of training data and other dynamics that could lead to unexpected bias.
AI/ML algorithm training: Bias is an inherent risk to modeling incomplete datasets, and of course, no dataset is ever complete. To promote trust and combat bias, government organizations should require that AI/ML firms characterize their training sets to better understand and anticipate potential inference deviations and biases. For example, models designed to understand human speech should be delivered with metrics identifying test data breakdowns based on gender, ethnicities, regional dialects, etc. Similarly, models trained to identify certain objects in desert environments should clearly identify risks if those same object detection models are applied in new biomes.
Human-in-the-loop feedback cycles: To the extent possible, systems should maintain appropriate human-in-the-loop standards and incorporate institutions’ and end-users’ decision-making processes, ensuring they have an appropriate level of human control over the outcome and their decisions can be captured and fed back to improve models. Maintaining a human in the loop provides an opportunity to identify model drift over time or precipitous drops in performance when a model is applied to data outside of the original training set.
Testing and Evaluation (T&E): Testing for bias in both data and model performance should be part of both T&E and monitoring pipelines for AI systems. Moreover, constant monitoring and T&E provides organizations with checks to alert on model drift or otherwise significant changes in model performance.

More generally, organizations can build trust and incentivize responsible AI development through acquisition by requiring that AI/ML models and development infrastructure adopt and make use of best practices and methodologies for accountability, legibility, interpretability, and explainability of systems.

Proposed solutions

In our collective response to the NSCAI, we provided a host of potential approaches to address the challenges described above. These approaches can be roughly categorized as either Procurement, Policy, Technology Investments, Organizational Constructs, or Cultural Dynamics solutions. The proposals below are by no means exhaustive, yet they capture the key themes and priorities we believe will most directly steer the U.S. Government towards faster, more effective collaboration with industry and, ultimately, more effective AI/ML solutions.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Conclusion

The U.S. Government’s pursuit and prioritization of AI/ML efforts is an important first step — but successful outcomes will require refinements on current programs. We believe the recommendations above will make a significant impact on the ability for AI/ML vendors and AI-adjacent firms to work in productive and ethically defensible ways with the U.S. Government and other large organizations to accelerate adoption of responsible and effective AI.

While we highlighted numerous challenges in our feedback to NSCAI, we also noted that progress is already being made. There is a lot to be excited about in the near future. We look forward to continuing this discussion with our partners in Government, Industry, and Academia to drive faster and more effective AI solutions.

Authors

Eric Heller, AI Policy & Strategy Lead, Palantir
Akash Jain, CTO, Palantir and President, Palantir USG