Action types • Parameters • Object dropdown security considerations • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Action types Parameters Object dropdown security considerations 

 Object dropdown security considerations

Static value filters in object dropdown validations are exposed to all users who can view the action type. Use of these filters risks exposing property value combinations to users without permissions to view the filtered objects. This risk is mitigated by relying on object properties or parameters to filter the object set. The values are not directly visible in the interface.

 Example: Data privacy issue

As an example, imagine we have a Document object with an Investigation Name property. In our action type, we add a filter on the object reference parameter to only show Documents where Investigation Name is Area 51 Investigation .

Here, we would potentially be revealing that Area 51 Investigation is a property value of some Document objects to users who cannot view those documents.

This only applies to static value filters . There is no reference to the Area 51 Investigation when filtering the Investigation Name property by a parameter or by the property of another object because:

The Investigation Name parameter is user-provided. No information about the underlying data is exposed to the action type viewer.

The Investigation Object parameter will respect existing restrictions on object visibility for this user.

Therefore, neither of these search queries represents a data privacy concern.

 Technical details

In most cases, the actions backend redacts sensitive information in the action type definition to avoid exposing sensitive property values. For example, action submission criteria are hidden from users who cannot edit action types. Similarly, a user will not be able to see the new object dropdown filters in the action type definition in the interface or while inspecting the response in the backend.

However, when viewing the action form, the object dropdown validation is converted into an object set. This means that users could review the network request containing this object set. In the example above, the user would receive an object set RID containing the Investigation Name = 'Area 51 Investigation' filter, revealing the existence of that property value even if they could not view any of its corresponding objects.

This means that these values will not be visible in the interface for any users. If visibility is a greater concern than security, this warning can be ignored.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Filter results of a parameter dropdown 

 NEXT Override parameter configurations 
 →