OSDK React applications • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Use case development OSDK React applications Overview 

 OSDK React applications

 Developer Console enables application builders to build completely customizable user interfaces using React and powered by the Ontology Software Development Kit (OSDK). By choosing React to build your application, you can leverage the pre-existing developer experience and incredible community investments into this technology to quickly deliver best-in-class user interfaces. By treating Foundry as your backend, you can leverage the Ontology's robust ability to perform high-scale queries and Foundry edits alongside granular governance controls to accelerate the process of securely developing applications that can power your organization.

This section of documentation will walk you through the creation, development, and deployment process of a React application within the Palantir platform.

 Create a Developer Console application 

 Develop and deploy your application 

 Troubleshooting 

 Development tools

Within the platform, we recommend using VS Code as your code editing tool. For more information on supported development tools, review the following documentation:

 VS Code editor overview and capabilities 

 Code Workspaces overview 

 Local development 

 OSDK documentation

OSDK is language-agnostic. Along with providing an NPM (Node Package Manager) library for TypeScript, we also support Pip and Conda for Python, Maven for Java, and OpenAPI specs for any other language. You can review other OSDK and Developer Console documentation using the links below:

 Ontology SDK overview 

 Developer Console and OSDK permission structure 

 Bootstrap a new TypeScript backend application 

 Bootstrap a new Python application 

 Examples and additional resources

Explore OSDK reference examples directly from the Examples application in the platform or the Developer Console home page. These examples provide self-paced lessons that demonstrate various OSDK capabilities to help you get started building your own applications:

 Getting started with Ontology SDK (OSDK): Build a to-do application: Dive into this step-by-step tutorial and learn how to create your very own to-do application using the power of the Ontology SDK (OSDK). The OSDK allows you to access the full power of the ontology directly from your development environment and treat Foundry as the backend to develop custom applications. This comprehensive guide will teach you everything from setting up your development environment to deploying your final product.

 Ontology SDK (OSDK) with AIP Logic: Build a to-do application powered by AIP Logic: AIP Logic is not locked inside Foundry; you can use it from anywhere you want. Dive into this step-by-step tutorial and learn how to create your very own to-do application using the power of OSDK. This comprehensive guide will teach you everything from setting up your development environment to running your application in production, including calling AIP Logic functions from React or Python applications.

 Create custom Workshop widgets using the Ontology SDK (OSDK): Use the Iframe widget in Workshop to embed Foundry web-hosted React applications in Workshop and share state bi-directionally.

Each example includes step-by-step instructions and code samples that you can follow at your own pace to gain hands-on experience with different OSDK features and implementation patterns.

 Advanced examples

 Advanced to-do application with the Ontology SDK (OSDK): This project demonstrates advanced features of the Ontology SDK (OSDK) using a to-do application as a practical example.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Slate / Add Slate application to a Marketplace product 

 NEXT Development environment 
 →