Object and link types • Object types • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Object types Overview 

 Object types

An object type is the schema definition of a real-world entity or event.
An object or object instance refers to a single instance of an object type; an object corresponds to a single real-world entity or event.
An object set refers to a collection of multiple object instances; that is, an object set represents a group of real-world entities or events.

For example, in the Ontology Manager, you may create an Employee object type that defines the characteristics for “All employees” or all objects of that type. An object refers to a single instance of the Employee object type, like the notional employees “Melissa Chang”, “Akriti Patel”, or “Diego Rodriguez.” A group of objects like “All tenured employees” represents an object set.

Similarly, in the Ontology Manager, you may create a Flight object type that defines characteristics for “All flights” or all objects of that type. An object refers to a single instance of the Flight object type, like “JFK → SFO 2021-02-24” or “TLV → LHR 2020-04-16.” A group of objects like “All arrived flights” represents an object set.

The concepts underpinning the Ontology have analogous concepts in the structure of a dataset. The definition of an object type in the Ontology is analogous to that of a dataset, while the definition of an object is analogous to that of a row in the dataset. The definition of an object set is analogous to a filtered set of rows in a dataset. For example, an Employee dataset may define the schema for “All employee rows.” In this case, a single row refers to a single employee, like “Melissa Chang,” “Akriti Patel,” or “Diego Rodriguez." If you filter the dataset based on tenure, you will have a set of rows that represent “All tenured employees.”

Rather than being an abstract data model, the Foundry Ontology maps each ontological concept to an organization's actual data, enabling this data asset to power real-world applications. Objects are created and displayed in user applications by adding backing datasources to an object type in the Ontology Manager. To create objects of type Employee , an organization will add backing datasources to the Employee object type and connect their employee directory and other enterprise data into the Ontology.

Get started by learning how to create an object type .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Types reference 

 NEXT Create an object type 
 →