Workshop • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Use case development Workshop Overview 

 Workshop

 Workshop enables application builders to create interactive and high-quality applications for operational users.

Workshop follows three key principles:

 Object data 

Workshop reduces the barrier to entry for application builders by using the Object layer as the primary building block. All data in a Workshop Application is read from the Object Data Layer, allowing application creators to take advantage of rich characteristics such as links between object types. Workshop leverages Actions for writeback to object data and Functions for business logic on object data.

 Consistent design 

All Workshop components follow a unified design system and are built to interact cleanly, have a consistent look and feel, and provide a high-quality end-user experience.

 Interactivity and complexity 

Applications built in Workshop are more dynamic and interactive than typical dashboards created in other point-and-click tools. By leveraging high-quality Layouts and an easy-to-use but sophisticated Events system , Workshop applications aim to be as user-friendly and high-quality as custom React applications.

Workshop is a flexible application builder that supports a wide range of possible use cases. Some common application patterns supported by Workshop include:

 Inbox Alert and Task Management 

Inboxes are commonly used to enable operational users to triage, prioritize and complete tasks. For instance, you might use a Workshop application to categorize new incoming warranty claims, or to triage and investigate alerts.

 Common Operational Pictures (COPs) 

A common operational picture (COP) is a display of relevant operational information shared across multiple organizations to facilitate awareness and collaboration. For example, you might build a Workshop application to serve as an “on-the-wall”, big-screen view of the current situation, containing a map, relevant statistics and charts, ways to filter or drill down on data, and connections to other views or workflows.

Palantir Learning portal

Try our "Deep dive: Building your first application" course on learn.palantir.com ↗ .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Curating apps in Applications Portal 

 NEXT Getting started 
 →