Training Track - Frontend & OSDK Developer 

 Courses

 Tracks

 Community

 Sign In 

We are actively investing in and evolving this Training Track and the in-platform Training App! If you have any feedback on either of these, please reach out to training-feedback@palantir.com 

Training Track

Frontend & OSDK Developer

Overview

Frontend & OSDK Developers leverage the Ontology Software Development Kit (Ontology SDK) to get the full power of the Ontology directly in whatever custom frontend or backend they&rsquo;re developing. By treating Foundry as a backend, these users can leverage the Ontology's robust ability to perform high-scale queries and Foundry writeback alongside granular governance controls to accelerate the process of securely developing applications. You can generate the Ontology SDK with Developer Console, a new portal for creating and managing applications using Palantir APIs. You can also use Developer Console to optionally host your custom React frontends, as well. This training track will enable you to learn the core concepts of Ontology and gain hands-on experience building a custom React application hosted in Foundry that can read and write data from the Ontology using OSDK.

Starting from Scratch?

Use the resources below for an introduction to core Frontend & OSDK Developer concepts.

 course 

Speedrun: Your first End-to-End Workflow

Build your first end-to-end workflow in under 60 minutes

 Step 1 

 course 

Deep Dive: Creating your first Ontology

Learn how to build in Ontology, create new objects, establish object relationships and use visualization tools to uncover insights in your Ontology.

 Step 2 

 example 

Getting Started with Ontology SDK (OSDK)

Learn how to create your very own To Do application utilizing the power of the Ontology Software Development Kit (OSDK).

 Step 3 

Advanced Content

Coming soon!

Additional Resources

 docs 

Ontology SDK Overview

The Ontology Software Development Kit (SDK) allows you to access the full power of the Ontology directly from your development environment.

 video 

Palantir Developers YouTube: The Ontology SDK

How to deploy the Ontology Software Development Kit (OSDK) to generate a custom SDK for your business and build AI-powered applications

Partner-Provided Material

 video 

Ontologize: Speedrun Your First End-to-End Workflow

In this tutorial, we cover the Speedrun: Your First End-to-End Workflow lesson.

 video 

Ontologize: Deep Dive Your first Ontology

In this tutorial, we cover the Deep Dive: Build your first Ontology lesson