Carbon • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Use case development Carbon Overview 

 Carbon

The Carbon application enables the configuration of custom platform experiences, known as workspaces , for specific user groups. Carbon can provide a focused experience for less technical users that need to carry out critical operational workflows.

For example, a Carbon workspace for aircraft parts maintenance might consist of:

A Workshop module containing a dynamically updated list of parts requiring maintenance,

A set of Foundry Actions for triaging each part,

A module that can be used to investigate each part's maintenance issue,

A Quiver analysis showing maintenance trends over time.

Administrators can create multiple Carbon workspaces tailored to specific user profiles and governed by robust permissions . In each workspace, administrators can highlight relevant workflows and applications, selectively hide the complexity of the overall platform, and restrict navigation outside of the Carbon workspace if necessary.

Carbon workspaces have a customized landing page along with a configured set of modules. When accessing Foundry through a Carbon workspace, a user will see only the subset of applications and resources needed for a specific workflow.

This documentation covers the basics of how to create, configure, and manage Carbon workspaces, as well as examples of several different workspace configurations.

 Access Carbon

Within Foundry, access Carbon by navigating to the Applications Portal and choosing Carbon workspaces . If you have already created a Carbon workspace and promoted it as an available application , you can search for the workspace name under the Promoted apps section of the Application Portal.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Autopilot [Experimental] / Getting started 

 NEXT Getting started 
 →