Top highlight

Tips on finding great jobs
Bryan Hanner
Follow
17 min read
·
Feb 19, 2020

195

1

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Fall of 2018, I applied to and interviewed with many tech companies in Seattle: everything from satellite offices of established companies to a two-person startup. Through the process that ultimately led me to Palantir, I assembled a job candidate’s toolbox for applying to companies, staying organized, and interviewing. I explain my process and considerations in the hopes that fellow job seekers can find a few takeaways that resonate with their own process.

Apply

When I approached the gargantuan task of finding a post-graduation job, I chiseled away at the work by starting early. Both in the sense of starting long before I wanted to find a job, and setting aside time to prepare for each unique conversation or interview along the way. That’s the major tool that helped me keep taking feedback and course-correcting as I met with companies. Personally, I started applying to roles about three months before I wanted to have everything decided, and I applied to Palantir halfway into that period. Touching up my resume for those first few applications and blowing the dust off talking about my work at DroidCon NYC got me in the mindset for what the next few months would look like. Once I was knee-deep in interviews, I’d make sure I had breathing room between events every day to nourish myself (get food and refill the water bottle), look over notes, and reset my mind from whatever I just came from. I could usually read through all my previous notes about a company before each time we’d talk.

Now, I want to point out that each application process will look different, even over time for a single person. It’s often a classic bootstrapping problem: I’m looking for a job but I haven’t done this job before, so how do I prove myself? There is no simple solution, but do not be discouraged if you get rejections or don’t hear back at first! Volunteering or working on your own projects are great ways to build your resume until other opportunities come your way. Many companies like Palantir will look beyond traditional experience and consider a wider variety of folks too. For instance, in a sea of no’s, I only had one interview the first cycle I applied for internships, and the conversation started because of my theater experience of all things. That ended up being my first internship.

As you explore the job market, keep in mind what you are prioritizing, measured by your time investments. I personally found success refining my resume and always answering the short answer questions in applications but seldom writing a traditional cover letter (very few were required). My Palantir application was an example of this, though since they provided a text box for their cover letter I wrote a short message there (cover letters can be short!). That being said, a cover letter might be extremely effective for you. I encourage you to tell your own story through your application and tweak how you present it based on what resonates with companies. More generally, if you find what pays off the most and invest time in that, you can choose the game you’re playing and play it well.

For my resume, I found success by returning to what a Google recruiter told me over my college years: “Quantify what you’ve done. We want to see what impact you’ve made: how many people you reached, how much money you saved, and so on.” While endeavoring not to sound like a robot, I did include hard numbers on my own resume when I could. In fact, one line was particularly inspired by this: “FAQs [what I was working on] will be used by 4,000+ service agents & 100,000+ customers across 3+ companies”. Even giving an order of magnitude communicates the scale you worked at, and just as importantly shows you’re thinking about scale in the first place.

The most important timing question is the first one in a dialogue with a company: when should you apply (or ask for a referral, if you know someone) to kick off the process? I would recommend applying and interviewing with several non-dream companies first to warm yourself up. If those work out, great! But then it won’t break your heart if you actually need the time to practice and get some wind under your interviewing sails. Now, one mistake I made in 2018 was applying too late to some companies I cared about because many of them were bigger companies that just couldn’t interview me before my offers started expiring (though I’ll note there can be flexibility in those deadlines). If I could go back and improve my timing to have even more offers available on my decision deadline, I’d be more aware of company size and growth rate, applying to bigger companies like Google, Facebook, and Uber significantly earlier. Then, you can also let these companies know (aka bug them) all recruiting season long that your application is in and that you would like to start the conversation. I got lucky, however, that Palantir was prompt and communicative, so I got through the process despite the crunch time.

Track Progress
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Be glad (and secretly disappointed) that you won’t be using this for tracking. Photo by Florian Klauer on Unsplash

I knew when I started applying for jobs that I was going to be talking with too many companies to keep in my head all at once. I can’t recommend highly enough taking constant notes whenever you learn something about a company : I filled 1.5 large notebooks, and they helped me refresh my memory along the way and make my final decision. I wrote most everything else down in electronic documents that I could access and update anywhere on-the-fly (including going to and from interviews). As far as I know, this is the part very few people think about, but I believe it can help no matter how many companies you are applying to.

I listed every single company I had researched, classifying them based on the criteria I cared about. Next to each company name, I kept important notes to refresh my memory, such as a friend who worked there who might refer me or a certain team/role/product that looked exciting. Less intuitively, I also tracked companies I wasn’t as interested in. For instance, I was mainly looking for roles in Seattle, so I kept a list of companies that didn’t have an office in Seattle and another list for companies that didn’t have engineering roles in Seattle. And another for companies that didn’t have any open positions, period. Whether I applied or not, I could always reference my list and remember what was important to me about a particular company. Then, I could know when my research proved me wrong and I wanted to reconsider a company.

I also tracked progress through the interview process of each company I applied to. My model for software engineering interviews from first to last was generally as follows: applied (not heard back), scheduling behavioral interview, behavioral, scheduling technical interview(s), technical(s), scheduling on-site, on-site, scheduling talk with hiring manager, hiring manager, and a final status. My options for a final status were “offer” (yay!), “done” (my nice way of saying the company wasn’t interested in considering me further for any roles), or “de-prioritized” (the rare case I chose to not actively pursue a role, letting them know as appropriate).

When career fairs came about, I researched each company that planned to come and made a list for each career fair within each progress/interest category (applied, have behavioral scheduled, no jobs in Seattle, etc), so I could reference my prepared material when I was walking between booths and prioritizing who I wanted to talk to. I found the career fairs particularly helpful for getting an application moving that had not reached the first interview or phone screen yet. Make sure to get recruiters’ contact info and followup in the next day! This is a critical part of getting things moving, and a lesson I sorely missed the year before.

I also found a couple miscellaneous materials useful. First, I kept a handy plaintext version of my resume for copy/pasting into text boxes on applications or online profiles like LinkedIn. I relied heavily on bullet-points here, which was also how my resume was structured. Second, I recorded my answers to short application questions in one place (e.g. “What is the most interesting project you’ve worked on?”), so I could quickly see if I’d already answered a general question and could reuse my old answer.

I’ll also add that it is definitely worth poking around online and talking to friends to see who you know working at companies you’re interested in. A good referral can make a world of difference, especially in getting you in the door for that first interview. It may also help if your latest interview leaves the company on the fence about whether or not to continue. You can write those down too and make sure a conversation doesn’t fall through the cracks.

To be honest, Palantir got on my list in the first place because it was among Microsoft, Amazon, Google, Apple, and Facebook as the only six companies specifically mentioned in the book Cracking the Coding Interview. Digging further, I was drawn to both the company vision and their technical goals. I was intrigued by the vision of building data platforms that are useful across a wide range of industries and organizations, embracing their differences to make what the company has to offer stronger as a whole. A blog post about Rubix (Palantir’s ephemeral infrastructure built on Kubernetes) gave an exciting and well-written example of the sort of formidable, backend challenges I was looking for. Though I had doubts rooted in Palantir’s media coverage, these strengths were starting to shine through even before I interviewed.

Interview
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Interviews can be fun! One of my favorites was designing this game. Photo by Kirill Sharkovski on Unsplash
Scheduling Interviews

I learned one core lesson the hard way from previous searches for internships: it’s important to schedule your interviews at times that work for you. While you should be professional and accommodating, the company will do its part in advocating for itself, so we the candidates can focus on our timing needs (certain times of day for peak mental acuity, leaving enough time in between other commitments for travel, etc.). If you feel comfortable sharing, letting recruiters know a little about what you’re working around can help build a good relationship and enable them to help you through the process better. If you are in school and have flexibility in your schedule, plan your classes around when you want to interview. I preferred to do my most important interviews in the mornings when I was freshest and on days when I didn’t have any class. When scheduling appointments, I’d prioritize the companies I was most interested in, giving them the better spots in my schedule while fitting in other companies around those. If only a small handful of times worked really well for how I wanted to prioritize that company, I’d only propose those best times at first. Recruiters will make those work if they can, and if none of them worked, they’d ask me for more options. I sometimes even explicitly invited them to let me know if my proposed times didn’t work, which let them know I was willing to work with them to find a time but had time preferences that would set me up for success.

For example, when Palantir emailed me about an on-site interview, they proposed dates the week before my decision deadline. I sent a message including “I have several offers that expire on November 30th and pushing the on-site out to the last week (especially with a possible follow-up interview after that) sounds risky since I want to make sure I can consider Palantir.” I then asked if there happened to be any earlier availability, so they let me know that a spot opened up a week earlier than their original dates. I gave Palantir prime time: in the morning on the one weekday I didn’t have any class. While companies can’t always accommodate scheduling shifts, it’s worth asking — everyone at a company wants you to succeed when you’re interviewing for them!

The Interview Process

This is where things get a bit more specific to software engineering, since interview processes in the field are broken into fairly well-defined “behavioral” and “technical” portions.

Get Bryan Hanner’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

To get everyone on the same page, behavioral interviews (or even behavioral questions within a technical interview before or after the technical question) are a chance to highlight your “soft” skills (teamwork, communication, leadership, etc.) and technical skills through past work, projects, or life experiences and share your goals for the future.

Technical interviews are focused on seeing your technical skills in action, using questions that generally fall into three categories:

A data-structures and algorithms question is the most common type of question, especially for less experienced engineers like new grads. They exercise your conceptual computer science muscles in a (hopefully) well-scoped problem.
A system design question highlights your ability to imagine all the components of a larger system and how they would interact to serve a user. This tends to be more creative (which I like) and have a broader scope so you can focus on the aspects that interest you. A classic example is designing an existing product such as a photo-sharing app or a game. I had to design Pac-Man once in a good amount of detail (e.g. the logic for passing time and tracking when Pac-Man and a ghost collide), and it was actually one of my favorite interviews.
The last type is an interactive coding session, which involves you diving into an existing code base and usually either debugging something or adding a small feature. This is generally a mix of reading and writing code.

Though I use different wording than the official description of the Palantir interview process (a great resource in its own right), Palantir uses these building blocks too. My interview process was a behavioral phone screen, a technical phone screen, three on-site interviews covering each type of technical question I list, and a final behavioral with a hiring manager (Two notes on how the general Palantir process can differ from mine: (1) what Palantir calls the “decomposition” question is not necessarily a system design question and (2) the hiring manager interview can include a technical component). The technical phone screen used a data structures problem that was both easy to describe and fun to solve. I later was impressed to learn that Palantir writes their own HackerRank questions! The final behavioral is rarer than the other steps. It seemed to give Palantir an opportunity to get to know me better and be more thoughtful about what team I’d start on (the Kubernetes infrastructure team I was so excited about). Other important deviations Palantir makes include a product demo and talks with engineers outside of the interviews. Both of these give candidates an opportunity to understand both the work and the people better. I was impressed that the demo’s workflows were described in terms of real-world outcomes (such as the ability to proactively identify component issues) rather than strictly discussing the software’s capabilities. The fact that they were willing to address any questions or concerns I had head-on, even proactively bringing up the company’s ethics for discussion, was also refreshing.

I centered my interviewing approach around the very helpful book Cracking the Coding Interview. It gives tips on applications and interviewing, guidance on behavioral interviews, reviews important computer science concepts, and provides lots of practice technical interview questions. I highly recommend buying a hard copy, so you don’t have to stare at a screen longer than you already have to in order to get through your day and read this article.

Cracking the Coding Interview’s advice changed how I approached my interviews. As an example of one such change, I’d research and write new questions in three categories for every interview: genuine (logistical, organizational, and smaller questions that are simply for you), insightful (questions demonstrating your research about the company and/or your technical understanding), and passion (bigger questions about the company or the interviewer’s experiences, showing excitement and curiosity). This framework got me thinking about a range of questions that taught me about the company while also showcasing my skills and preparation.

Behavioral Questions

Another tool from the book I found particularly helpful was creating a table with a column for each major experience on my resume and the following rows: challenges I faced, mistakes/failures I made, what I enjoyed, leadership I showed, conflicts I encountered and ideally resolved, and what I’d do differently in retrospect. I also found it helpful to write an outline for describing myself (basically a verbal biographical story, my extended “elevator pitch”) since almost everyone asks this. I tried to include a beginning, middle, and end to create a story where working at the company was a clear epilogue. You’ll also find many interviewers ask the same questions, so if you need more supplements to the table, add them to your toolbox. Put these all in one place, and then you have some great notes to put in front of you and reference during a behavioral. You bet they were in front of me for my Palantir one!

Technical Questions
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Remember: your interviews will be easier than levitating these markers. Photo by Mark Rabe on Unsplash

Here’s how I like to approach these. First, see if your interviewer wants to ask you any behavioral questions. If so, it’ll probably be at the beginning or the end (I’ve yet to see a pop-quiz behavioral-question break in an interview). They’ll almost always want to answer your questions at the end. Leave time for all this around the technical question. Second, listen carefully to the question’s problem statement before dissecting the question and understanding its ins, outs, and edge cases. Third, if the solution is the least bit unclear, write an outline to work out the big ideas and hopefully prevent writing unneeded code. Fourth, start actually coding. It wouldn’t be uncommon for me to take half the interview to get to this point. Plus, the code often comes quickly after the outlining step. If a step makes sense as a helper function (especially if unsure about its implementation), name it and come back to it after the first draft. The prioritization here can be impressive. Next, you can gauge or explicitly ask the interviewer (especially if time is running short): are the helper functions important/easy enough to implement instead of spending that time testing and discussing the solution as a whole? If there’s plenty of time or the interviewer wants you to keep implementing, I’d go ahead and implement all the helper functions you wrote, but don’t underestimate the critical nature of testing. By taking the time to test, you can fix those typos and “easy” bugs that you missed the first time around, and you can take advantage of what you’ve learned during the interview to catch more edge cases and rethink the problem. Whenever you finish your solution, make sure to start testing before your interviewer begins to point out issues! Most of them wait to do so, but some won’t. Your interviewer will also likely want to hear about the runtime and pros/cons of the solution, so you should leave time to tell them. If you realize something crucial towards the end, sometimes it’s worth jumping into what your new solution would be (at least at a high level) instead of answering the analysis questions (or perhaps even the behavioral questions if you’re on red alert). You can also throw in the runtime and trade-offs yourself without being asked, which can leave a good impression and be more time-efficient.

To stay focused and on the same page with the interviewer, the best advice I can give is to talk through everything you’re thinking. This is particularly helpful if you’re on the phone and you have a restricted communication channel (no body language, visual cues, etc). Trust your instincts because your curiosity in finding the solution will naturally unearth the misunderstandings you have with the problem. Once you know what you don’t understand, you can ask clarifying questions and work through potential answers. Don’t be afraid to voice the open questions you have at any point of the interview. These are critical windows into your work style for your interviewer, so it’s a great way to make their job a bit easier. Also, the more specific you can make your questions, the more you can teach yourself and the more able the interviewer will be to help you out and point you in the right direction. For example, it is much more useful to discuss how some seemingly contradictory constraints of the problem (e.g. certain parts of correctness and efficiency) can be resolved instead of thinking about how to “make your solution more efficient”. Don’t let the interviewer wonder what you’re thinking, so start practicing writing on the whiteboard and talking at the same time!

It is important to also listen to your interviewer and keep a two-way dialogue. Listening and speaking your mind complement each other as naturally as a fantastic wine-pairing I am not aware of. Find out what they care about and what they want to see. Ask about them and their work if you get the chance. Every interviewer-question pair is different, and often times, they are happy to help you prioritize. You can also be aware of subtle physical or verbal cues signifying “it’s time to move on”, “the interviewer is confused of where you are going”, and so on to save the time or the potential awkwardness of asking. I’ve found they appreciate you telling them right off the bat if you have already solved the problem as well. They’ll usually have backup questions for this situation. In some cases, I’ve had some interviewers have me walk through my old solution and then they’ve given me a second technical question.

Another piece of advice that lies at the core of my engineering principles is to talk in terms as close to the problem space and as far away from the technical code as possible. It helps me keep my priorities straight and see the ultimate goal ahead of me.

At the end of the day, it’s practice, practice, practice! And then most importantly, have fun! Find a friend who you can practice with, so you get used to explaining your workflow to another person and working through tricky parts with someone who knows the solution. If you’re limited on time, I would treat it the same way I treat tests: get as much content as you can on your mind before the interview and then iterate between practicing interviews, checking your work, and taking feedback until the interview starts. If a company sends you a link to a site like HackerRank, practice writing and running code in that environment before the interview. Reading through the review sections of a book like Cracking the Coding Interview and taking notes is a great way to refresh yourself. Find someone to explain it back to if you can. Don’t forget to take some time to reflect on how each practice session and interview went! It never hurts to ask your recruiter for feedback either, in case their company policy allows them to give it.

Interviewing the Company

While a company considers if a candidate is a good fit for a role, the candidate should also interview the company to see if it is a good fit for the candidate’s open position of “employer.”

During my Palantir interviews, I remember being surprised by how everyone I talked to was both compassionate and highly skilled. Humble and honest. These attributes are hard to come by in a single person, yet I saw them again and again throughout my interviews. Another key detail I picked up on was how willing the company was to invest in someone pursuing a new idea with business value, no matter the person’s seniority. It was also one of the few companies at which I had a technical interview with a woman (I was interviewed by two, which should be much more common than it is). Thus, Palantir moved onto the next stage of my interview process.

A Decision
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Photo by Raquel Martínez on Unsplash

At the end of the day, I needed to decide on one company where I’d start my career. I kept in mind that I was choosing from a set of great options, that there wasn’t one “perfect” apple I needed to pick from the fruit stand. I considered many aspects like which company would give me responsibility from the beginning, mentorship, resources to innovate, and fun, invigorating people to work with. I thought back to the personalities of the people I met during the Palantir interviews, my excitement and curiosity about the product, and the quirky culture that connected it all. Palantir straddled the identities of an ambitious startup and an established company with resources to do big things. And it seemed like a place where I could fit in and make an impact. I chose Palantir, and most everything I expected has proven correct. I have learned a lot in the first five months, and I’m looking forward to what I’ll take on in the next five.