Foundry Rules • Core concepts • Object model • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Foundry Rules Core concepts Object model 

 Object model

There are two primary object model concepts that are relevant to Foundry Rules:

 Rules , which are applied to data, and

 Proposals , which provide a means by which rules can be changed.

 Rules

Rules are standard objects consisting of:

A collection of rule metadata properties such as name, description, author, rule type, etc.

A collection of custom properties to be applied to the filtered dataset or passed to the transform.

For “alerting” patterns, these might be alert_severity , alert_assignee , or priority .

For “categorization” patterns, these might be group , sub-group , etc.

A logic property containing the match conditions for that rule.

The logic is stored as a compressed JSON blob that conforms to a specific grammar for consistent serialization.

Learn how to customize properties for your own workflow.

 Proposals

Many rule management use cases have corresponding requirements for an audit and review process governing the creation, editing, and deletion of rules. To service these needs, Foundry Rules supports rule proposals as a method of submitting, reviewing, and monitoring changes to rules. Rule proposals are analogous to the software development concept of "pull requests" ↗ , such that each rule can have multiple proposals at a given time.

Proposals are a feature and not a requirement of Foundry Rules. Since Foundry Rules employs standard objects and Actions to create this approval flow, the workflow can be customized as desired to match any operational or regulatory requirements for rule change management.

Proposals are represented as objects containing:

The rule ID to be edited, created, or deleted.

 Proposal metadata such as the proposal author, timestamp, status (open, approved, rejected), and reviewer.

The diff of the changes in the proposal (i.e. list of the changes), captured in properties: old_rule_name , new_rule_name , old_logic , new_logic , etc.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Overview 

 NEXT Workshop application 
 →