Technical Challenges in Data Sharing
Palantir
Follow
11 min read
·
Apr 10, 2020

176

The COVID-19 crisis is creating unprecedented need and demand for information sharing. Decision-makers today require more context than their own organization, databases, standards, and well-trodden communication channels can supply. For example, UK regions with previously disconnected mandates now exchange data with one another on the availability and utilization of critical equipment, such as ventilators, across their respective hospital networks. We’re observing a key emergent challenge: how to provide this cross-cutting broad information access while still protecting privacy and respecting content ownership.

Content sharing is a nuanced problem: too often, content owners see access as all-or-nothing. Over the last 15 years we’ve developed expertise in that nuance, providing software platforms that let organizations share their content along a spectrum of no-access to all-access. While sometimes that smooth spectrum might seem complex, our engineering efforts always start with a foundational set of principles, seeking to get as close as possible to an ideal solution. Below, we explore the key principles we think a good solution requires, a brief articulation of the kind of solution we’ve built in Foundry and Gotham, and how these platforms are used today to enable secure data sharing workflows in the context of our COVID-19 work.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Principles

We think about access and sharing along three principal dimensions that both limit and provision specific access: What (content), Why (purpose), and Who (users).

What. First, we need to get specific about the content. That content might be data, logic, or even high-order information like decisions. Data comes in many shapes and sizes; we can think about it abstractly as files or tables or even databases. In some systems, we might consider objects (semantic models that match a particular world-view) and object relationships. But the what comprises more than just data: we can consider sharing metadata, logic, models, data pipelines, or higher-order information artifacts such as decisions.

It is also necessary to consider whether we mean the whole of any of these. If, for instance, the government wants to understand commercial airline freight capacity, it’s one thing to communicate capacity and routes; it’s quite another to communicate crew schedules. This kind of sharing demands granular views.

When we discuss what, we need to think about how consumers of information will trust its veracity. In high-quality data systems, veracity is usually a function of some number of asserted invariants (or health checks) and a high degree of provenance: how the data, logic, and decisions came into being. In the context of granular sharing, we need to enable owners to decide how much of this provenance can or should be shared.

Why. Second, when we share information we need to understand the purpose. Practitioners are often painfully aware of complex and sometimes onerous requirements of Data Usage Agreements (DUAs). We think a good engineering solution does more than present and track the agreement. In fact, it should enable and enforce that agreement so that users can focus on analysis and operational outcomes, with the system ensuring data is used only for the intended purpose stipulated by the data’s owners, even across system boundaries.

In order to enforce limits on why and to preserve user focus on productive work, good systems help users declare their purpose both at the start of a session and as their work progresses. That is, the purpose of work is a function both of the data owner’s restrictions and the user’s intent. It is necessary to confront this complexity early, because different purposes may be mutually exclusive and thus access to some content may affect access to other content. For example, we may want to limit concurrent access to understand both crew travel and aircraft capacity in the same session, even if both content elements have otherwise been shared to and would be readable by the same user.

Who. Third, sharing is specific to users (and/or groups). Sharing isn’t an opaque access credentialing exercise. Instead it involves authorizing specific users to share, as we’ve discussed above, specific content for a specific purpose and duration. We should also consider more abstract definitions of a user. In some cases, we may only know that employees with a specific supervisor should gain access to content, and to keep access control lists up to date, a good system would enable encoding the rule over the list.

Capabilities

Let’s next look at a number of software capabilities that help implement data sharing workflows in accordance with the principles laid out above.

Resource and user models. As a starting point, we need explicit models for information resources and the users interacting with those resources. It is beneficial to think about information resources in the broadest possible sense, including for instance databases, datasets, tables, indices, time series, analyses, visualizations, AI/ML models, data transformations, data pipelines and schedules, health checks, Git repositories, reports, dashboards, data-driven applications, and so on. Users are ideally modeled with respect to their organizational context, such as groups.

We should also think carefully about the granularity of the information resource model. We will see below that resources are the natural place to anchor access control rules, and as such the granularity of the resource model is directly linked with the granularity of the permission system and with the granularity of permission-aware data sharing workflows. For example, if resources are only tracked at a database or table level, then it is hard to design a sharing workflow for individual rows or columns.

Provenance. Information resources don’t exist in isolation; instead they are connected through processes like data import or export, data pipelines, ML training, or information sharing. The graph of resources and their relationships is called the resource provenance graph. The conceptual idea behind data provenance is straightforward: for every resource, a provenance-aware data system can answer how it was derived, where it came from (e.g., which other information it was derived from), who produced it, and when it was produced.

In terms of the three fundamental questions above, comprehensive provenance allows us to answer the What. It caters to human instincts: in order to trust information and data, we want to understand where it is coming from, whether it is reliable, whether it is up-to-date, who produced it, and how it evolved. Transparency around these questions builds trust and is the foundation for collaboration across data silos.

Provenance is not limited to the past, but can also extend into the future. For example, a data pipeline system could maintain a record of all scheduled data transformation jobs and their transitive effect on derived data assets in downstream datasets, indices, or applications. In the context of data sharing, future provenance is particularly useful because it allows data owners to understand which data version will be shared when, and with which receiver.

Access control. The job of the access control mechanism is to provide yes/no answers to a simple question: can a given user access a given information resource for a given purpose? To answer this question, we can first associate access control rules to resources, and then guard every API that exposes information resources with an authorization barrier that evaluates the respective rules. Two interesting technical considerations are the coverage of the authorization system and the expressiveness of the rule language. Regarding the former, clearly the access control system is the more useful the more APIs and services it covers in one integrated system.

Regarding the expressiveness of the access control system, a good starting point are access control lists or rule-based authorization. A more expressive access control model is attribute-based access control (ABAC). ABAC rules take into account both the context of the data they are applied to (e.g., a rule may differentiate access to Bank objects based on the value of their sales target, such as Consumer, Small Business, or Large Commercial Enterprise) and the context of the user asking for access (e.g., the LDAP groups that I am a member of or the set of NDAs that I have signed).

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

Further, we can differentiate between discretionary and mandatory controls. In a nutshell, discretionary controls grant access, for instance when a user shares a link to a visualization with a colleague, and mandatory controls restrict access, for instance via organization-wide data governance rules. Many ABAC systems can express Boolean combinations of context-specific rules. Complex discretionary ABAC rules can implement constraints regarding the purpose of data usage (cf. the Why principle above). As a concrete example, we can prevent mixing of information resources with certain properties, conceptually expressed as PropertyA XOR PropertyB.

Provenance-aware access control. In data systems, it is typically most convenient to attach mandatory controls to input datasets in order to mirror the permission structure present in source databases. Mandatory controls can also reflect organizational, geographic, or legislative constraints. For instance, data originating in a particular country may only be accessed from workstations in that country or by citizens of that country.

Data provenance is particularly useful for enforcing mandatory controls throughout an information ecosystem: given the mandatory controls on source systems, data provenance can be used to propagate these controls through data transformations to all derived data assets and applications. Continuing the example from above, let’s assume that the country-specific data is used to power a machine learning model; data provenance and mandatory controls jointly enforce that this machine learning model can only be accessed inside the country and/or by respective citizens because it was trained on (and thus contains) source data subject to those controls or is bound by distinct regional regulatory restrictions.

Note that mandatory controls trump discretionary access: if a citizen of the country in the above example shares the dataset with a non-citizen, thereby granting them discretionary access, they may still not access the dataset because they do not satisfy the organization-wide mandatory access policy. In other words, the combination of mandatory access controls and system-wide provenance gives data owners control of downstream use of their data assets.

Resource-scoped sessions. Our engineering practices for access control systems are informed by our early experience in the government space, where attribute-based access control is the norm, and where there’s already a natural modeling of what, why and who. Similarly, we inherited the idea that users would declare intent at the beginning of their session, and update intent over the course of their session as it evolves or changes in analytical iteration loops. Further, it’s from these environments we first learned the need to forcibly separate intent so that an otherwise powerful data system can’t be misused.

Audit. ABAC, mandatory and discretionary access control, and provenance are all good and well, but how do we prove that their implementations have the expected effect on the concrete data governance decisions? All data and API access should contribute to an audit trail that captures who had access to what data and why the access was granted. In other words, the audit trail answers precisely the axiomatic principles governing data access.

Two example use cases for audit trails are as follows: First, the audit trail can be used to automatically validate data governance invariants and thus catch unintentional or malicious privilege escalation. Second, auditors can analyze audit logs in post-incident investigations. In both of these examples, the audit trail may be interpreted from a user-centric (“What did this user do”?) or a data-centric (“Who accessed this piece of information?”) perspective.

We believe that transparency is paramount for establishing trust in data governance. To this end, we share the semantics of our access control frameworks as well as the actual audit trails with our customers and explicitly help them model system and data use.

Workflows

In response to COVID-19, our customers in governments and industry are re-allocating resources in non-traditional ways (e.g., using passenger planes for cargo, refitting factories to produce face masks or in-demand pharmaceuticals) and entire industries such as automotive or aerospace plan for both ramp-down (e.g., what should I do to keep my equipment in safe operating condition while shutdown?) and ramp-up (e.g., which products can I deliver given logistical restrictions? which products can I produce given available resources?) of their operations. This shift in focus implies an unprecedented demand for cross-domain information sharing in order to make sense of the (new) world. To help match up theory with reality, we’ll now explore a few concrete data sharing workflows and illustrate how the principles and capabilities from the previous sections can be applied.

Redact and release. Let us start with the simple redaction workflow depicted in the adjacent diagram. Source datasets A and B are combined by some data transformation (say, a dataset join or union) into a derived dataset C; the small blue and green boxes indicate mandatory controls that are propagated from A/B to C via the provenance graph: assuming conjunctive controls, access to C requires access to both A and B.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

In order to share a subset of dataset C to users that do not have access to source dataset A, a data owner can derive a further dataset D in which the sensitive information is redacted, for instance by filtering out certain rows, attributes, or columns. The data owner can then downgrade the mandatory controls on D and release it with derived mandatory controls on data source B (green box) only.

Note that redact and release workflows are highly privileged operations that can generally only be performed by data owners who satisfy all mandatory controls and have special data release permissions. Of course such redaction workflows are captured by the audit system. Redaction always requires explicit human oversight and sign-off because there is no general algorithmic way to determine whether some derived information contains certain privileged information from an input dataset. For example, human oversight for redact and release workflows can be established through code review and approval processes.

Transparent data flow. The starting point for data sharing workflows is of course a dataset that is to be shared. Sharable datasets generally do not drop from the sky, but they are themselves derived from other source datasets, for instance by joining, unifying, or enriching data from different databases or organizations. Typically, such data derivations are not static, but change with both updated source data or improved derivation logic. For example, for governments we are helping with COVID-19 response, we are integrating publicly available open source data on infection numbers that update multiple times a day.

The dynamic nature of shared datasets brings an interesting challenge: how do data consumers get informed of changes to the dataset? A simple case is an additive change like an additional number of rows in a tabular dataset, but a more complex change is a schema change like the addition or removal of a column, an update to previously shared data, or a subtle change to the semantics of an attribute. When downstream consumers start building applications and thus start depending on the shape of shared data, it is no longer acceptable to silently propagate such potentially breaking changes.

For example, Foundry supports a number of mechanisms for safely propagating data changes. First, the provenance graph captures the status quo of each shared data set: what logic derived it from what input datasets. Foundry’s pipeline orchestration system propagates changes on user-defined schedules and with integrity constraints. (For example, diamond dependencies on input datasets are resolved consistently.) Since all datasets are versioned, downstream consumers can elect to receive new data versions as they become available, or they can stick with a fixed version and upgrade manually. Data owners can specify integrity and consistency checks that are validated by the orchestration system before changes or propagated to consumers. Finally, Foundry extends software engineering workflows like branching and code reviews to data engineering, enabling transparent collaboration between data owners and consumers.

Conclusion

Through our COVID-19 response work with our government and private sector partners, we are witnessing unprecedented demand for information sharing workflows. Since previously valid assumptions about economies, businesses, and societies may no longer be valid, decision-makers and operators around the globe seek broad contextual information to prepare for an uncertain future.

Secure content sharing is an immense challenge, both for software technology and for our norms. Individually and as a company we are very proud that we are being given a chance to be part of this journey through our people, skills, and software. We hope you enjoyed this whirlwind tour of some of the data security and sharing principles that enable Palantir to be effective and responsible partners in combating COVID-19.

Authors

Mark and Robert are the founding engineers of the Palantir Foundry data platform.