Checkpoints • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Security & governance Checkpoints Overview 

 Checkpoints

Checkpoints is a data governance tool that supports purpose justification and auditability. Checkpoints allows you to interrupt potentially sensitive user interactions with prompts requesting justification for the activity. These justifications can then be reviewed in the platform to ensure adherence to data protection, governance, and compliance policies.

The above screenshot uses notional data.

 What is a checkpoint?

A checkpoint is a prompt that asks a user to provide a justification for an interaction in Foundry. The user’s justification is recorded and made available for later review to administrator users in the Checkpoints application. Users can also always review historical justifications for their own interactions in the Checkpoints application.

The above screenshot uses notional data.

The prompt in each checkpoint and the type of justification required is set in a checkpoint configuration . Once submitted, each checkpoint produces a checkpoint record that contains the contextual data associated with an interaction governed by a checkpoint. This includes the timestamp of the interaction, the user who performed the interaction, the justification provided in the checkpoint, the checkpoint type, and any data (resources, objects, and Markings, for example) associated with the interaction.

 Key features

 Customize prompts and justifications: Data protection or compliance policies can vary widely based on organizational needs and use cases. Checkpoints allows for granular configurability to determine who gets shown a checkpoint, for what kinds of interactions, what language the checkpoint contains, and how the user should justify their interaction.

 Review justifications in real-time: Data protection and compliance teams or administrators can review checkpoints in Foundry in real-time as users justify their interactions.

 Deep platform integration for key Foundry interactions: Checkpoints is integrated into 60+ different interactions in Foundry, which allows for seamless requests for justification at a variety of points in user workflows. This happens both when the interactions are initiated synchronously by a user, or asynchronously via a request in Approvals . Checkpoints can be used to remind users of organizational policies, suggest more privacy-protective workflows, or better understand why users are making certain interactions for improved oversight.

 Access the Checkpoints application

The Checkpoints application allows users to configure checkpoints and review checkpoint records. All users can use the Checkpoints application to review checkpoint records that they have submitted. The Checkpoints application can be accessed in the navigation panel in the Data Governance category.

Users can also configure checkpoints or review checkpoint records for entire Organizations or spaces .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Approvals / Review a request 

 NEXT Core concepts 
 →