Object and link types • Shared properties • Use shared properties on object types • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Shared properties Use shared properties on object types 

 Use shared properties on object types

To update a property on an object type to a shared property, complete the following steps:

Navigate to the object type in the Ontology Manager.

Select the property on the panel that you want to update, then scroll down to the Shared Property section of the configuration.

Use the dropdown menu to select an existing shared property to use, or convert the property to a new shared property with the shared property creation modal.

The property will then display as a shared property. To persist the use of the shared property to the Ontology, select Save in the upper right.

When using a shared property on an object, the property ID and API name of the object-specific property will remain unchanged so as to not break existing downstream workflows that leverage them.

While associated with a shared property, direct edits to property metadata that is inherited from the shared property will be disabled. You can still add, delete, or edit type classes. When the property is loaded, the resulting set of type classes will be a union of those from the property and its associated shared property.

If the shared property you use has different render hint configuration values than the selected property, using the shared property will override the configuration values of the selected property. Make sure your shared property is configured with the proper render hints for your use case.

 Detach a shared property from an object

To detach a property from a shared property, use the same property panel on an object type in the Ontology Manager and select Detach .

Doing so will remove the association between the property and the shared property.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Edit shared properties 

 NEXT Metadata reference 
 →