Cipher • Core concepts • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Security & governance Cipher Core concepts 

 Core concepts

This page provides an introduction to the core concepts of Cipher.

 Channels

A Cipher Channel is a Foundry resource that is visible in the filesystem workspace. A Channel serves as the starting point to create your encryption or hashing framework. Channels describe a specific protocol for obfuscating or de-obfuscating values, including either an encryption algorithm, parameters and values for the encryption keys, or a hashing algorithm and secret.

 Learn how to create a Cipher channel. 

 Licenses

A Cipher License is a Foundry resource accessible in the filesystem workspace that controls permissions to use cryptographic operations defined in a given Cipher Channel. Each License corresponds to exactly one parent Channel. Users with access privileges which allow them to view a License can use all the Channel operations the License allows. Like other Foundry resources, a License can be moved around and shared; however, note that any changes will affect user accessibility for the Channel associated with the License.

 Learn how to issue a Cipher license. 

 Cipher-encrypted values

Values encrypted with Cipher follow a format known as a Cipher-encrypted value which has the following syntax: CIPHER::<channel-rid>::<encrypted-value>::CIPHER . This format allows the Cipher service to gather the metadata needed to decrypt the value, providing the user has the right permissions.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Overview 

 NEXT Getting started 
 →