Concepts • Users and groups • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Security & governance Concepts Users and groups 

 Users and groups

 Users

Access to Foundry is managed via one or more identity providers , which give Foundry the ability to validate users as they log in. Identity providers also supply information on users, their attributes, and groups. Foundry can integrate seamlessly with your existing identity provider, allowing full end-to-end access administration and management through your existing system. See Authentication and Organization Assignment to learn more about configuring authentication via Control Panel.

A user is an authenticated individual with access to Foundry. A user is typically defined by an external identity provider (e.g. an Active Directory system). A user has attributes which is public, structured information about the user.

Learn more about managing users .

 Groups

A group is a set of users . Groups make it easier to manage security groups and customize the Foundry user experience for multiple users at a time. Access to Projects and resources are usually granted to groups rather than individual users. The Securing a data foundation documentation highlights how groups are used to manage permissions.

A group is typically defined by an external identity provider (for example, a customer Active Directory system) and applied throughout the Foundry platform.

Learn more about managing groups .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Portfolios 

 NEXT Markings 
 →