Interfaces • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Interfaces Overview 

 Interfaces

An interface is an Ontology type that describes the shape of an object type and its capabilities. Interfaces allow for consistent modeling of and interaction with object types that share a common shape. For example, a Facility interface may include Facility Name and Location properties. Facility could be implemented by object types such as Airport , Manufacturing Plant , or Maintenance Hangar , which could each contain additional type-specific properties.

By using the Facility interface, workflows can interact with Airport , Manufacturing Plant , and Maintenance Hangar object types, either in aggregate or independently, without needing to know specific details about those object types. Additionally, if new object types that implement the Facility interface are introduced, the workflow will be immediately compatible with the new object types without additional refactors.

Review the current levels of support to learn more about where you can use interfaces in the platform.

 Interface features

An interface is composed of interface properties, link type constraints , and metadata about the interface. Interface properties can be defined locally on the interface (recommended) or using shared properties . An interface can be implemented by multiple object types.

Much like interfaces in programming languages, you can extend an interface to create a child interface that inherits the properties of the original interface, then add new, more specific properties to the child interface. Object types can then implement the interface to indicate that they conform to the interface definition. Object types can implement multiple interfaces, for use in different workflows. Interfaces can also extend multiple other interfaces, including interfaces that themselves extend other interfaces, resulting in properties that are inherited through layers of interfaces.

 Differences between interfaces and object types

There are both functional and stylistic differences between interfaces and object types within the Ontology.

Object types are concrete; they have schemas defined by shared or local properties, are backed by datasets containing property values, and can be instantiated as objects.

By contrast, interfaces are abstract; they have schemas defined by interface properties, are not backed by datasets, and cannot be instantiated directly but must be instantiated as a specific object type.

Stylistically, interfaces are visually distinguished from object types in the platform by having dashed lines around their icons.

 Interface permissions

Interfaces are permissioned through Ontology roles .

 Current levels of support

As support for interface Ontology types expands, availability will vary across the Palantir platform.

Interfaces are currently supported in the following applications and services:

 Ontology Manager : Define, edit, and implement interfaces.

 Marketplace : Package and install interfaces.

 Functions : TypeScript v2 functions.

Interfaces are partially supported in the following applications and services:

 Actions : Define actions to create, modify, or delete objects implementing an interface. Actions cannot reference interface link type constraints directly, but they can reference the concrete link types used to implement the interface link type.

 Object Set Service : Search and sort objects by interfaces. Support for aggregating by interfaces is in development. Support for interface link types is in development.

 Ontology SDK : Use interfaces as an API layer for interacting with implementing object types. Support varies by language; TypeScript is currently supported and support for Java and Python is in development.

Interfaces are under active development, but not yet supported in the following:

 Workshop 

 Functions : TypeScript v1 and Python functions

 Get started with interfaces

To add interfaces to your Ontology, you can create new interfaces or extend existing ones. Once you have an interface, you can then implement that interface with an object type of the appropriate shape or edit it to better fit your Organization as your Ontology evolves.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Functions / Unit testing / Debug 

 NEXT Create an interface 
 →