From Service to Software
Palantir
Follow
10 min read
·
May 30, 2019

131

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Editor’s Note: This post’s author/interviewer, Chris Musselman, joined Palantir‘s Commercial business team after a long career in the US Navy. Listen to Chris talk more about his transition on the Beyond the Uniform podcast with fellow Palantir veteran Michael Adams.

Members of the military are conditioned to view career success as checking a series of boxes. Transitioning out of the service is often the first time we find ourselves without a roadmap, asking ourselves what we actually want to do instead of what we’ve been told we should or must do. The anxiety and uncertainty of determining the perfect next step is greater than that of any combat operation. But this moment also presents this opportunity to untangle who you are from what you’ve done, and to develop a deeper sense of what you want both personally and professionally.

Leaving the service last year after 21 years as a Navy SEAL, I found a wealth of resources to assist in writing a resume and nailing an interview, but struggled to determine what I actually wanted to do. Only after no fewer than 100 conversations with friends, colleagues, folks I’d never met, and an executive coach did I finally hone in on what I both wanted and needed from my next role: a culture grounded in drive and mission; an organization that values execution, initiative and learning; and a business foundation for running my own company in the future.

We have a strong community of veterans at Palantir who hail from many different branches of military services around the world. They’ve landed in a similarly diverse range of roles at Palantir, whether working with customers, building software, or running internal teams. Each has their own story of transition and advice for others embarking on this journey, and in this post, we’ve asked five of them to share theirs.

Navigating this transition requires time, effort, introspection, and exploration. On that last note — exploration — I found that my many different conversations helped me understand and weigh all of the options available to me. Similarly, I hope our colleagues’ stories offer useful insights for both veterans and their future colleagues.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Palantir USG Business Lead, Seth R, and other mentors work with transitioning veterans as part of the Commit Foundation’s Transition Mentoring Workshop. The Commit Foundation is one of a few organizations we partner with to support and engage the veteran community.
What did you do in the military?

Joe (Santa Monica): “For my first deployment to East Baghdad, I was a Rifle Platoon Leader and Company XO with the 10th Mountain Division. For my second, I was the Intelligence Officer for an infantry battalion with the 101st Airborne in Kunar, Afghanistan. I stayed in the reserves for a few years after active duty, at the Defense Intelligence Agency, and as an ROTC instructor.”

Suzi (Washington D.C.): “I served as an active duty US Marine for eight years and as a reservist for two years, deploying once to Afghanistan and twice to Iraq. I was a Communications Officer by trade but held billets such as the Female Engagement Team OIC and Aide de Camp. “

Jack (Palo Alto): “I was a geospatial intelligence officer in the Australian Army for seven years, serving operationally with tactical Army units including deployments with Australia’s intelligence and special operations communities.”

Ash (London): “For me, the military was an incredibly diverse 22-year adventure! I was extremely fortunate to have worked in a plethora of tactical, operational, and strategic roles at home and abroad. I began my career as a Gurkha officer and then transitioned into more specialist roles, where I spent the following 14 years leading elite national and multi-national teams in some of the world’s most complex and hostile environments.”

Why were you drawn to Palantir?

Joe (Santa Monica): “Once I decided that I wanted to work in data technology, Palantir stood out because it offered the opportunity to work across both product and sales, on a forward deployed team. Most enterprise tech companies have a hard line between these two business units, and with my background I’d have fallen squarely on the sales side of it. On top of that, Palantir offered the prospect of working across multiple industries, and learning them each deeply.”

Suzi (Washington D.C.): “Once I decided to leave Active Duty, Palantir was the only place I wanted to work. I used Palantir as a Marine in Afghanistan to build out and connect networks of malevolence, and to make better, more informed decisions about where my team traveled and who we engaged with. Bottom line, Palantir saved lives.”

Jack (Palo Alto): “I was first exposed to Palantir in my work in the Australian Army. I immediately saw the value and impact the Gotham platform had enabling crucial and time sensitive workflows for operators and analysts. When thinking about my next steps, I dug deeper and discovered more about the company’s origins and values. The most notable draw-card to Palantir was company culture, namely:

A workplace where I was able to continue to work in support of the mission within the tech industry;
A workplace that builds technology with purpose, and has a deep engineering-first culture
The opportunity to work with some of the most talented, diverse group of humans who truly embrace the notion that the best idea wins regardless of tenure, seniority, or status.”

Sharon (Oslo): “I’m unspeakably proud of my service, and being a veteran is an important part of my identity, but truthfully the uniform didn’t always feel like it fit right. I’ve always been the type to ask a lot of questions and never accept things at face value, so being an enlisted soldier in the Army was a straitjacket at times. I suppose that was one of the things that drew me to Palantir right away. My first interactions with the company were with my interviewers, who asked fascinating questions and seemed as excited about talking through problems as they did about arriving at a solution. And everyone was just so animated about what they were working on. I was hooked.”

What do you do at Palantir?

Joe (Santa Monica): “I’ve held many different roles in my few years at Palantir, all within the realm of customer-facing work in our Commercial, or private sector, business. I started out training users. I later led a couple of finance engagements and piloted projects in supply chain, manufacturing, and pharmaceuticals. For the past few months I’ve been focused on building our sales muscle by crafting demos that reflect the great work we do around the world, and sharpening how we communicate what we do.”

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

Jack (Palo Alto): “I am a Site Reliability Operations Analyst (SRO), which loosely equates to a Technical Project Manager. I’ve worked on projects across the company and across the world, including trader oversight for a major European financial services institution, critical work within the Five Eyes Intelligence Community, and operations and resourcing for one of our product development groups at our Silicon Valley HQ.”

Sharon (Oslo): “I’m a Deployment Strategist who leads some of our Business Development teams. In Palantir terms, that makes me pretty good at holding strategy and driving execution, while communicating clearly and empathetically — both internally and across the table with customers. I’ve spent my Palantir years working on various government outcomes first on the US Government side, and then with some of our International Government partners. I love that stuff. Among our users are tons of whip-smart unsung heroes who really care about keeping their friends and countrymen safe. It’s extremely gratifying to play a role in making these users more effective.”

How was your transition? What went well? What didn’t?

Joe (Santa Monica): “I had a long transition, with a couple years at a think tank in DC and a couple years at business school. The hardest thing about it by far was figuring out what I wanted to do with my career. In the Army, you can identify the two or three jobs you want to work toward, and there is a fairly clear path to get there. This is just not true in business, where the scope of options is impossibly broad.”

Jack (Palo Alto): “When I transitioned from Army in 2015, I was ready for a new environment and set of challenges, but I wanted to remain connected to the the national security community. So I targeted somewhere I had domain knowledge, starting with a geographic information systems (GIS) company in my first year out of uniform. I thoroughly enjoyed the work and had a successful twelve months, but it was not all smooth sailing. Things I found challenging included:

Being viewed as the ‘Army guy’ rather than judged on my achievements, personal traits, and drive to succeed.
Understanding different incentives for people who had not served in the military.
Work that was still heavily siloed between business and functional areas, opaque, and tied to dollars rather than impact.”

Ash (London): “I was very lucky. Having come from a specialist background where one is given a lot of freedom to use one’s own initiative, often with limited direction, my transition was smoother than for many. For me, the only real challenge during the move into full-time civilian employment was understanding how much opportunity there is and trying to narrow down the scope of the job search to those roles where I might find the best fit.”

Can you speak to your experience as a veteran at Palantir?

Ash (London): “As I am fairly new, I am still navigating the organization, but the support and encouragement I’ve received from Pal-Vets (employee resource group) has been very welcome. I am quite passionate about my work in the veterans’ mental health and employment space, and our veterans’ group has been very supportive and engaged on that effort.”

Joe (Santa Monica): “Primarily, I’ve tried to recruit more veterans to Palantir. This can be difficult in an organization that values hard technical skills so highly, but the veterans at Palantir succeed because of their ability to learn new things quickly, continuously adapt in a fluid environment, and stay oriented on mission and outcome.”

Sharon (Oslo): “I’ve enjoyed my engagement with our Veteran community and think Palantir can be a natural landing place for veterans for lots of reasons. We are preeminent Getting Things Done (GTD) warriors and have an inborn ability to eat pain to achieve a greater purpose. For us, entitlement does not translate. But it can be maddeningly difficult to find your place at Palantir. No one is going to hand you a career roadmap, tell you what courses to take, and tell you which skills to develop. Knowing exactly what mold you’re meant to fill can be a great source of comfort, but the downside is it creates a natural ceiling. By contrast, the hardest part of being at Palantir is finding your floor. What are your core strengths and how do they manifest in outcomes — in other words, what “grounds” you? Once you find your feet, so to speak, there is virtually no ceiling here. That can be scary, but it’s at least equally exhilarating. If I were doing it all over again, I’d just relax on figuring out Palantir and spend more time focused on figuring myself out.”

Suzi (Washington D.C.): “I found a new tribe at Palantir — individuals who shared an intense work ethic, an ability to think critically about issues that matter, a passion for problem solving, and a desire to work as part and parcel of a team for a purpose much greater than themselves. This new team supported me during my initial transition as well as my continued service as a Marine reservist. I took a military leave of absence for ten months in 2015, during which Palantir not only supported me, but also ensured my family felt supported by remaining in close contact with them while I was overseas.”

Jack (Palo Alto): “Palantir’s veteran community is tight knit, and something that I am proud to be a part of. We’re a group that supports each other as well as the the great work done by other groups of folks coming from non-traditional backgrounds for tech into Palantir. Personally, I have been involved in our efforts in recruiting high quality veterans in Australia, the UK, and the US. This has ranged from networking and social events to specific events at Palantir run by great partner programs. I have also been involved in organizing and being a part of veteran community-building events at Palantir across our offices, and at veteran off-sites. Having the opportunity to meet other veterans, share experiences (both positive and negative), and learn from each others’ paths has been a great way for me to continue to learn, grow, and make great friends.”

What would you share with other veterans making the transition?

Jack (Palo Alto): “Everyone has different situations and motivations for transitioning from service life to their next chapter. With that being said and in my experience, I believe folks looking to transition should ensure you:

Meet with other veterans who have made the transition already and have taken different paths in and out of uniform. Understand their perspectives, learn from their mistakes, and listen to the wisdom they have to offer. You’re not alone!
Understand your own motivations and desires for leaving the military deeply. Just like you would in uniform, conduct a thorough appreciation process, develop multiple courses of action, develop a plan with contingencies, and understand that no plan survives H-hour completely.
Seek out and work on something you’re passionate to work on. If you aren’t going to enjoy what you do on exiting, you are more likely to boomerang back into uniform (which is also OK!).”

Joe (Santa Monica): “Knowing yourself, and being true to that, is the hardest thing. It’s very easy to start making decisions in the basis of what you think you should be doing, but really the questions should be what do you love to do? Where are you truly excellent?”

Ash (London): “For anyone transitioning or beginning to think about leaving government service, take time to map out your network. Canvas widely and don’t turn down any opportunities to meet veterans in every sector as the opportunity that ultimately secures you a rewarding role may be the one you least expected and didn’t see coming!”

Suzi (Washington D.C.): “Seek out the people you want to work with. Purpose, fulfillment, growth, and happiness will follow.”

— Interviews were conducted by Chris Musselman. To learn more about our approach to building and retaining a diverse workforce, visit our website.