Object and link types • Structs • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Structs Overview 

 Structs

A struct is an Ontology property base type that allows users to create schema-based properties with multiple fields. Struct properties are created from struct type dataset columns. Struct property fields can have different data sources as long as the property is transformed into a single struct type column before being defined in the Ontology.

Many common object properties can be modeled as structs. For example, a Full Name property with the fields First Name and Last Name , or an Address property that includes Street , City , Postal Code , and Country fields.

 Struct configuration

The following is a list of struct property constraints and allowed configurations:

Structs have a depth of one and cannot be nested.

Structs must have at least 1 field, and can contain up to 10 fields.

Only the following field types are currently supported:

 BOOLEAN 

 BYTE 

 DATE 

 DECIMAL 

 DOUBLE 

 FLOAT 

 GEOPOINT 

 INTEGER 

 LONG 

 SHORT 

 STRING 

 TIMESTAMP 

 Query semantics

Structs are indexed similarly to ElasticSearch object field types ↗ , which means that arrays can have unintuitive behavior. For example, if you have an array of Full Name properties, an object containing [{"firstName": "Harvey", "lastName": "Dent"}, {"firstName": "Two", "lastName": "Face"}] would match a query for "firstName": "Harvey" AND "lastName": "Face" . The two conditions are treated independently, rather than requiring to match on the same struct within the array.

 Current levels of support

As support for struct property types expands, availability will vary across the Palantir platform.

Structs are currently supported in the following applications and services:

 Ontology Manager : Define and edit structs.

 Actions : Use actions to create and modify struct property values .

 Pipeline Builder : Define and edit structs.

 Workshop : Display and use struct properties as variables.

 Marketplace : Package and install struct properties.

 Object Explorer : Search for objects by their struct property values (struct field search is under development).

 Ontology SDK : Load struct properties and search for objects by their struct property values in Ontology SDK applications. Not all Ontology SDKs support struct properties. Refer to the OSDK unsupported property types for more information.

 Functions : Struct parameters and struct property edits are supported in TypeScript v2 and Python functions.

Structs will not be supported in Object Storage V1 (Phonograph) and can currently only be created from datasets and Restricted Views.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Properties / Property reducers 

 NEXT Create a struct type 
 →