Are You Ready? New Palantir modules help enable readiness at the world’s most critical institutions
Palantir
Follow
4 min read
·
Aug 11, 2022

109

4

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Today’s most critical organizations — including government agencies, health providers, NGOs, and energy companies — continually face a key challenge: how can they continue to serve their mission in the face of an increasingly volatile world? The effects of climate change, global health epidemics, international conflict, and economic uncertainty are sending shockwaves across labor markets and supply chains — complicating the management of critical resources at large, mission-driven institutions.

Today, organizations that have been too busy reacting to crises over the last few years are now blindsided by more unexpected pivots and reversals in direction brought about by changing regulatory practices, employee work habits, material costs, and economic projections.

In response to these challenges, leading government agencies and organizations are adopting a proactive stance toward operations and decision-making. Inspired by the rise of data analytics and AI technologies, they are looking to identify problems before they happen, using data to implement preemptive measures and ensure organizational readiness. Operating within a globalized economy, at a time of global conflict, disease, and climate threats, these agencies are under increasing pressure to modernize and adapt to a changing world.

In order to help these enterprises accomplish their mission, Palantir is introducing three modules to help leaders become proactive in their asset, personnel, and financial management through an integrated 360-degree view into their organizations.
Press enter or click to view image in full size

By bringing together data from across siloed source systems, leaders and day-to-day operational users can:

Gain a real-time comprehensive picture of past, present, and future personnel readiness from an organizational aggregate down to the individual or role.
Enable scheduling and triage of training tasks to ensure requirement completion and personnel readiness.
Evaluate attrition for proactive recruitment, training, and retention decision making.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Measure and assess real-time asset health and availability while unlocking strategic insights and key performance indicators to assess readiness from across the entire fleet down to a single installed component.
Alert, triage, and prioritize issues in real time, and manage operational capabilities across the platform and component lifecycle.
Gain a comprehensive picture of maintenance operations and supply chains.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Bring together real-time information from various sources, enabling more accurate budget forecasts and better planning.
Consolidate budget, financial, and contracting data, so that analysts can track how spend and revenue is progressing, proactively identify groups likely to under- or overspend, and highlight budget variance before it becomes a problem for the organization.

Watch the modules in action and access our in-depth whitepapers here.

Case Study: The U.S. Army

The Palantir Platform revolutionized the Army’s approach to personnel optimization, force readiness, and decision-making. To date, the platform has integrated more than 160 source systems and over 30,000 tables of data, many with millions of rows each. Data comes from across every area and function within the Army — from finance, readiness, personnel, and logistics data to complementary open-source and third-party data sources — to build a digital twin of the Army’s operations and resources. This data ecosystem powers force readiness for 65,000+ units, 1,000,000+ billets for personnel, and 1,500,000+ pieces of equipment connected, updated, and changed daily.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

At the Army, the Palantir Platform also helped maximize cost savings and return on investment in military contracting, acquisition, and finance domains by employing modeling and advanced analytics to predict which contracts are most likely to have excess funds that will expire soon. Leveraging insights derived from Palantir, the US ACC was able to successfully deobligate more than $3.3B in funding in 2020, versus $2.0-$2.6 billion in previous years. From March 1 to September 30, 2020, usable deobligations were more than $2.7 billion, versus $1.5-$2 billion in past years.

Conclusion

With Palantir for Readiness, data is translated to outcomes with an aggregate understanding of organizational readiness. Proven at the Army, one of the world’s largest organizations by headcount and complexity, Palantir’s readiness modules can deliver transformational impact for your organization — and help support your mission in an increasingly volatile world.

Learn more or request a demo today.