Overview and getting started • Breaking changes between OSv1 and OSv2 • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Overview and getting started Breaking changes between OSv1 and OSv2 

 Breaking changes between Object Storage V1 and Object Storage V2

The transition from Object Storage V1 (Phonograph) to Object Storage V2 (OSv2) is a major architectural shift that requires a number of breaking changes. The legacy Object Storage V1 (Phonograph) has a large API surface area, exposing significant amounts of low-level database functionality directly. Conversely, the new Object Storage V2 architecture syncs objects through the Object Data Funnel service into specialized object databases to gain scale, performance, flexibility, and security improvements. This architectural transition leads to two main types of breaking changes:

Specialized object databases, being designed for specific use cases, may not offer the same functionality as Object Storage V1. This may require workflows to be modeled differently in OSv2 than in OSv1.

Separating dimensions of concern that had been consolidated in Object Storage V1 requires refactoring of some existing queries that interact directly with OSv1 APIs.

These breaking changes may block some OSv1-backed object types from migrating to OSv2 without refactoring or remediation. The documentation on migrating to OSv2 contains more information on how these issues are surfaced to the user, as well as how to perform a migration from OSv1 to OSv2.

 Permanent breaking changes

This section provides a list of breaking changes between Object Storage V1 (Phonograph) and Object Storage V2 (OSv2). These breaking changes should be addressed before trying to migrate any object type to OSv2. All of these changes between OSv1 and OSv2 are intended to improve the quality of data going into the Ontology, ensure more deterministic behavior, and increase legibility across the platform.

 Actions and edits

OSv2 only supports user edits via Actions. All existing direct queries on OSv1 edit APIs must be refactored to use Actions before migrating to OSv2.

OSv2 renames "writeback datasets" as "materializations". In OSv1, writeback datasets are required; in OSv2, materializations are optional. See Materializations for more details on materialized datasets.

 Edit history

The migration from OSv1 to OSv2 provides the option to preserve edit history on the object.

Enabling this option will include edit history with the migration process. Note that this will incur additional compute costs for processing and storage.

If this is not enabled, previous edits from OSv1 will persist; however, the full edit history from OSv1 will not be available in OSv2. Once the migration is completed, it will not be possible to recover the full edit history from OSv1. Users are required to acknowledge that when migrating to Object Storage V2, the history of user edits (Actions) will not be preserved except for Action Logs.

 Track user edit history will need to be enabled for object types in OSv2 within the Ontology Manager and object views will need to be updated to add the Edit History widget to display user edit histories.

Users may also configure Action Log object types to otherwise capture how Actions affect objects; also, see the Action Log Timeline widget to display a history of Actions across targeted objects.

 Data restrictions

OSv2 enforces data restrictions on primary keys and property types to ensure the quality of data going into the ontology. For the full list of restrictions, see the documentation on OSv2 data restrictions .

 Changelog and incremental updates

For object types with a changelog datasource, OSv2 does not consider the "latest timestamp wins" semantic used by legacy changelog datasets .

OSv2 indexes all pipelines incrementally by default; all relevant changelog calculations are automatically performed in the background by Funnel, rendering the "changelog python decorator" obsolete.

OSv2 has stricter validations on geopoint properties.

 Monitoring

OSv2 object types can only be monitored by monitoring views , which replaces the Object Storage V1 (Phonograph) sync status health check .

 Object Set Service (OSS) changes

OSS APIs do not have query string support; OSv1 does have query string support.

OSS cardinality metrics are not supported on object sets that contain objects from both Object Storage V1 and Object Storage V2, such as multi-backend object sets.

 Temporary breaking changes

This section lists out the current feature gap between Object Storage V1 (Phonograph) and Object Storage V2 (OSv2). These features are in development and the list will be updated as the breaking changes are resolved.

OSv2 currently does not support connecting schedules where the path between the upstream and downstream targets would go through a materialization.

OSv2 currently does not support custom analyzers.

Foundry Rules Archetypes currently does not support the full feature set of OSv2. For example, object types backed by multiple datasources and object types with multiple materializations are not supported. You can refer to the Foundry Rules documentation for more details.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Overview 

 NEXT Migrate from OSv1 to OSv2 
 →