Object and link types • Properties • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Properties Overview 

 Properties

A property of an object type is the schema definition of a characteristic of a real-world entity or event. A property value refers to the value of a property on an object, or a single instance of that real world entity or event.

For example, in the Ontology Manager, an Employee object type may have properties employee number , start date , and role . The notional employee “Melissa Chang” may have property values “11502” for employee number , “October 9, 2016” for start date , and “software engineer” for role .

Similarly, in the Ontology Manager, a Flight object type may have properties departure date , arrival date , and passenger count . The object “JFK → SFO 24-02-2021” may have property values “24-02-2021” for departure date , “25-02-2021” for arrival date , and “150” for passenger count .

The concepts underpinning the Ontology have analogous concepts in the structure of a dataset. The definition of a property in the Ontology is analogous to that of a column in a dataset, while the definition of a property value is analogous to that of a field in the dataset. For example, an Employee dataset may have columns for departure date , arrival date , and passenger count . In this case, a single field will have the value “11502” for the employee number column of the row for employee “Melissa Chang.”

Rather than being an abstract data model, the Foundry Ontology maps each ontological concept to an organization's actual data, enabling this data asset to power real-world applications. Property values are created and displayed in user applications by adding backing datasources to an object type in the Ontology Manager. To create property values for properties employee number , start date , and role on objects of type Employee , an organization will add backing datasources to the Employee object type and feed their employee directory and other enterprise data into the Ontology.

 Supported property types

 Property base type Valid as title key? Valid as primary key? Notes 

 Commonly used: String , Integer , Short Yes Yes 

 Time-based: Date , Timestamp Yes Discouraged Typically, time values are inappropriate as primary keys, due to potentially unexpected collisions / uniqueness based on the storage format differing from the display format. In most cases, we recommend using String instead. 

 Number-like: Boolean , Byte , Long Yes Discouraged Boolean limits your object type to two object instances. Byte properties can only be assigned in Actions via an Integer parameter, so in most cases we recommend using Integer properties instead. Long has representational issues in Javascript , so not all frontend libraries and code work well with Long values greater than 1e15. In most cases, we recommend using String instead. 

 Float-like: Float , Double , Decimal Yes No 

 Vector No No 

 Array Yes No Array properties cannot contain null elements.
If the inner type of the Array is not a valid title property, the Array property also cannot be used as the title property.
Nested arrays are not supported in Object Storage V2. 

 Struct No No Struct properties do not support nesting, and fields cannot be arrays. See the struct documentation for detailed information on supported field types. 

 Media Reference , Time Series , Attachment No No 

 Geopoint Yes No 

 Geoshape No No 

 Marking No No 

 Cipher Yes No 

To learn more about base types, see base types .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Object types / Metadata reference 

 NEXT Edit object type properties 
 →