Palantir Foundry and Artificial Intelligence
 Platform (AIP) is a powerful data integration, data modeling, low code development, and
 analytics platform that can be deployed on Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure (OCI). Palantir's industry leading technology can be beneficial to a
 variety of customer segments including government and defense, finance and banking,
 healthcare, life sciences, telecommunications, energy and utilities, and manufacturing. You
 can use this powerful set of curated and integrated tools to turn complex data into
 actionable insights. 

Palantir Foundry and AIP is a software-as-a-service (SaaS) offering that
 runs on OCI. The sizing, installation, and integration activities are all highly bespoke
 and traditionally accomplished in cooperation with the Palantir customer deployment
 teams. The architecture described here is for informational and advanced planning
 purposes only. To go through the process of implementing Foundry and AIP, reach out to
 and work directly with your Palantir account team.

Architecture

This architecture provides a technical overview of Foundry from a functional
 and a deployment-oriented perspective. 

The following image is a functional view of Foundry and AIP on OCI.

 Description of the illustration palantir-foundry-aip-functional-view.png 
 palantir-foundry-aip-functional-view-oracle.zip 

In the middle of the diagram, we see Palantir Foundry and AIP and its key
 components like data integration, ontology, decisions, modeling, analytics, application
 building, and core services running within an OCI tenancy and leveraging core OCI
 capabilities like flexible compute, instance pools, OCI Object Storage , OCI Identity and Access Management , Oracle Key Management Cloud
 Service , flexible load balancer-as-a-service, and others.

Customer data is ingested into Foundry from a variety of data sources using
 Palantir’s standard data integration patterns, whether those be public data sources
 (public APIs, 3rd party SaaS), private sources running in OCI such as MySQL HeatWave or
 Oracle Autonomous Database, or private sources running in on-premises networks or in
 other clouds through Palantir’s on-premises agent.

Some aspects depicted in the architecture are tailored solutions which are
 not productized features of Foundry, and which rely on custom implementations of OCI
 services within a customer's own tenancy to work in conjunction with Foundry. For more
 details, see the "Considerations" section of this document. 

The following image is a deployment-oriented view of Foundry and AIP on
 OCI. 
 Description of the illustration palantir-foundry-aip-technical-view.png 

 palantir-foundry-aip-technical-view-oracle.zip 

Foundry on OCI takes advantage of OCI’s high availability constructs of
 multiple availability domains (ADs) within a region (where applicable) as well as
 multiple fault domains (FDs) inside of each AD. 

All public internet data sources from public API and other cloud service
 provider (CSP) object storage flows to and from the public subnet through internet
 gateways with transport layer encryption while the private subnets leverage OCI service
 gateways to communicate privately with OCI Object Storage and other OCI platform services. Instances in the private subnet also leverage NAT
 gateways to communicate with any Palantir shared services external to OCI; these include
 Palantir's management plane and observability and management platform named Apollo.
 Customers may also choose to leverage OCI FastConnect instead of, or in addition to, Site-to-Site VPNs to integrate their on-premises
 systems with their Palantir tenancy.

 This architecture supports the following OCI components:

 Tenancy 
A tenancy is a
 secure and isolated partition that Oracle sets up
 within Oracle Cloud when you sign up for Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure . You can create, organize, and administer your
 resources in Oracle Cloud within your tenancy. A
 tenancy is synonymous with a company or
 organization. Usually, a company will have a
 single tenancy and reflect its organizational
 structure within that tenancy. A single tenancy is
 usually associated with a single subscription, and
 a single subscription usually only has one
 tenancy.

 Region 
An Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure region is a localized geographic area that
 contains one or more data centers, called
 availability domains. Regions are independent of
 other regions, and vast distances can separate
 them (across countries or even
 continents).

 Availability domain 
Availability domains are standalone, independent data centers within a region. The physical resources in each availability domain are isolated from the resources in the other availability domains, which provides fault tolerance. Availability domains don’t share infrastructure such as power or cooling, or the internal availability domain network. So, a failure at one availability domain shouldn't affect the other availability domains in the region.

 Fault domain 
A fault
 domain is a grouping of hardware and
 infrastructure within an availability domain. Each
 availability domain has three fault domains with
 independent power and hardware. When you
 distribute resources across multiple fault
 domains, your applications can tolerate physical
 server failure, system maintenance, and power
 failures inside a fault domain.

 Virtual cloud network
 (VCN) and subnet 
A VCN is a customizable,
 software-defined network that you set up in an Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure region. Like traditional data center networks,
 VCNs give you control over your network
 environment. A VCN can have multiple
 non-overlapping CIDR blocks that you can change
 after you create the VCN. You can segment a VCN
 into subnets, which can be scoped to a region or
 to an availability domain. Each subnet consists of
 a contiguous range of addresses that don't overlap
 with the other subnets in the VCN. You can change
 the size of a subnet after creation. A subnet can
 be public or private. 

 Security list 
For each
 subnet, you can create security rules that specify
 the source, destination, and type of traffic that
 must be allowed in and out of the subnet.

 Site-to-Site VPN 
Site-to-Site VPN
 provides IPSec VPN connectivity between your
 on-premises network and VCNs in Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure . The IPSec protocol suite encrypts IP traffic
 before the packets are transferred from the source
 to the destination and decrypts the traffic when
 it arrives.

 FastConnect 
 Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure FastConnect provides an easy way to create a dedicated,
 private connection between your data center and
 Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure . FastConnect provides higher-bandwidth options
 and a more reliable networking experience when
 compared with internet-based connections.

 Internet
 gateway 
The internet gateway
 allows traffic between the public subnets in a VCN
 and the public internet.

 Network
 address translation (NAT) gateway 
A
 NAT gateway enables private resources in a VCN to
 access hosts on the internet, without exposing
 those resources to incoming internet
 connections.

 Service
 gateway 
The service gateway
 provides access from a VCN to other services, such
 as Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure Object Storage . The traffic from the VCN to the Oracle service
 travels over the Oracle network fabric and does
 not traverse the internet.

 Compute 
With
 Oracle Cloud Infrastructure
 Compute , you can provision and manage compute hosts in
 the cloud. You can launch compute instances with
 shapes that meet your resource requirements
 for CPU, memory, network bandwidth, and storage.
 After creating a compute instance, you can access
 it securely, restart it, attach and detach
 volumes, and terminate it when you no longer need
 it.

 Object storage 

 Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure Object Storage provides quick access to large
 amounts of structured and unstructured data of any
 content type, including database backups, analytic
 data, and rich content such as images and videos.
 You can safely and securely store and then
 retrieve data directly from the internet or from
 within the cloud platform. You can scale storage
 without experiencing any degradation in
 performance or service reliability. Use standard
 storage for "hot" storage that you need to access
 quickly, immediately, and frequently. Use archive
 storage for "cold" storage that you retain for
 long periods of time and seldom or rarely
 access.

The following are Palantir components:

 Data Integration Services 
Foundry provides a highly
 configurable set of data connectivity and integration tools that extend far
 beyond typical extract-transform-load (ETL) or extract-load-transform (ELT)
 solutions. Foundry is designed to reduce the cost of data integration over time
 through a rich suite of capabilities that act as a force multiplier for data
 teams.

 Ontology 
The Palantir Ontology is an operational layer for the
 organization. The Ontology sits on top of the digital assets integrated into the
 Palantir platform (datasets and models) and connects them to their real-world
 counterparts, ranging from physical assets like plants, equipment, and products
 to concepts like customer orders or financial transactions. In many settings,
 the Ontology serves as a digital twin of the organization, containing both the
 semantic elements (objects, properties, links) and kinetic elements (actions,
 functions, dynamic security) needed to enable use cases of all types.

 Palantir Management Plane 
The management plane is an external
 Palantir controller that securely orchestrates the operations of multiple
 customer environments.

 Apollo Upgrade and Telemetry 

Apollo is a continuous delivery and orchestration platform developed by Palantir.
 It is designed to automate the deployment, scaling, and maintenance of complex
 software applications across a variety of environments, including cloud,
 on-premises, and edge devices. Apollo enables companies to deploy their software
 securely and reliably, managing the operational challenges associated with
 running critical applications at scale.

 Audit security information and event management (SIEM )

Audit logs from all Palantir services are first written to disk and
 then archived to an OCI Object Storage bucket within 24 hours of being written. Access to these buckets is
 aggressively restricted. Palantir customers have the option to enable audit
 infrastructure that will export audit logs from the archive to a
 per-organization dataset for analysis within Foundry or a downstream
 SIEM.

Recommendations

 Each Foundry deployment is installed in its own
 tenancy and lands inside a virtual cloud network with two subnets, one public and one
 private. The private subnet hosts the Foundry and AIP control plane (CP) and
 the data plane (DP) running inside an OCI instance pool to facilitate scaling the number of
 nodes up and down per workload demands. 

As the consumer of a software-as-a-service (SaaS) application running atop
 OCI and managed by Palantir, you are not required to worry about individual OCI
 constructs like VCNs, subnets, security lists, network security groups, or gateways.
 Whether your Palantir implementation is in your tenancy or in Palantir's tenancy,
 Palantir engineers apply OCI best practices to ensure optimal use of OCI resources for
 the Foundry and Artificial Intelligence Platform.

Considerations

When planning to run Palantir with OCI, consider the following. 

 OCI Tenancy 
Palantir is certified to run in OCI in a
 single-tenant capacity, either within a customer's tenancy or on behalf of a
 customer inside Palantir's own OCI tenancy. 

 Subnets 
The public subnet will host up to three Foundry egress routers
 bound to reserved OCI public IPs and load balancer instances which front
 Kubernetes ‘Service’ types. 

 Deployment 
Palantir Foundry and Artificial
 Intelligence Platform is not self-deployable. Please work with your Oracle and
 Palantir account teams to provision an environment for your use.

 Custom Implementations 
Some aspects of the architecture are
 forward-looking and not currently implemented. They rely on custom
 implementations of OCI services within your own tenancy to work in conjunction
 with Foundry. Your Palantir and Oracle account teams can assist you with the
 following: 

 Unified Integration 
 Oracle Integration has a catalog of over one hundred adapters for a diverse set of 3rd
 party and Oracle applications. Plugging Foundry into this ecosystem with
 a native adapter will allow customers with existing Oracle Integration flows to include Foundry in their orchestrations as well as enable
 Palantir to quickly and easily ingest data from the broader Oracle
 application ecosystem including Oracle Fusion, E-Business Suite, Oracle
 Property Management (Opera), and Oracle Health (Cerner).

 Reports and Analytics 
While Palantir
 customers already have access to reports and visualizations within
 Foundry, some customers may choose to integrate data from Foundry into
 broader organizational reports and dashboards. For this type of use
 case, consider integrating Foundry with Oracle Analytics Cloud.

 Machine Learning and AI 
Foundry comes with
 tools for machine learning (ML) model building and deployment. For
 customers invested or interested in Oracle AI and ML tools like Data
 Science or Data Catalog, an integration between the two modeling suites
 could be advantageous.

Explore More

Learn more about Oracle Cloud Infrastructure and Palantir.

 Oracle Cloud
 Infrastructure Documentation 

 Palantir
 Documentation 

Acknowledgments

 Author : Ed Shnekendorf, Distinguished Cloud Architect,
 Oracle Cloud Infrastructure