Purpose-based Access Controls at Palantir (Palantir Explained, #2)
Palantir
Follow
4 min read
·
Dec 4, 2020

442

Editor’s note: This is the second post in Palantir Explained, a series that explores a range of topics, including our approach to privacy, security, AI/ML safety and more. Read the first post to learn more about Palantir’s business model.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Privacy is always a fundamental consideration in our work at Palantir. Our customers typically use many disparate systems that contain critical or sensitive data, and decision makers at these organizations need to draw upon this information to make business-critical — or even life-saving — decisions. It’s imperative that access to this data is tightly controlled and tracked.

For example, to manage the spread of COVID-19, healthcare organizations have needed to rapidly bring together data from many systems — testing programs, care homes, and hospitals — and give thousands of users, from healthcare workers to academics, access to different subsets of this information.

This creates an acute challenge for data governance teams. Tracking who has access to what information and why, across thousands of datasets and thousands of users quickly becomes an exceptionally complex problem. In order to protect the privacy of the individuals whose personal information is in the data, data governance teams must ensure that users only have access to sensitive or personal data when strictly necessary.

This challenge grows exponentially with organizational scale. As the number of access requests grows, so too does the number of potential failures. Auditing decisions to grant access is difficult if the access requests were made by telephone, email, or even in person. Data governance teams often rely on more technical colleagues to grant access to the data itself, and this can make it hard for the data governance team to check whether their decision has been appropriately enforced.

In this blog post, we explain Purpose-Based Access Controls — unique tools within Palantir Foundry designed to help data governance teams solve this challenge.

Palantir Foundry’s Purpose-based Access Controls

We created the Purpose-Based Access Control tool to tackle this challenge by tightly integrating the data governance process into the underlying access control system of Palantir Foundry.

When designing the tool, we had three objectives:

Introduce structure and clarity to data access decisions
Capture missing context and make it available to the people who need it
Build intuitive tooling for non-technical data governance teams to enforce rules

Instead of applying for access to an individual data set, a potential user applies for access to a Purpose. The Purpose is set by data governance teams to contain data specifically scoped to help the user meet their goal — no more, no less. Every user must apply to a Purpose, and they only have access to the data that’s been assigned to that Purpose.

Get Palantir’s stories in your inbox

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Subscribe

Data governance teams must record a rationale for their decision at the same time they grant a user access to data. Likewise, data owners must record a rationale when they approve the use of a data set for a Purpose. Recording these justifications prompts both sides to continually consider the necessity and proportionality of their decisions. The output of that assessment is captured in Palantir Foundry, making it available to data governance teams for review.

At any point, an auditor can understand not just who has access to what data, but also why they were given access — with all the context that went into that decision.

Demo

Watch how a user can request access to a Purpose:

Watch how data owners can take control of how and why their data is used:

Why This Is Advantageous

With Purposes, governance officials can quickly and intuitively understand their data landscape. Capturing context from access discussions in the platform provides a rich, persistent understanding of why key decisions have been made. Providing non-technical governance administrators with intuitive tooling enables them to grant access and enforce controls themselves, rather than relying on technical colleagues to do so on their behalf.

Partitioning data processing into Purposes and assigning each Purpose an owner strengthens accountability and prevents the formation of “dark areas” that have escaped governance oversight. Because it is clear why someone has access to a specific data set, it is also clearer when access is no longer necessary.

We believe that many organizations would benefit from implementing a purpose-based access model. If you would like to learn more about our unique Purpose-Based Access Controls, please get in touch. We welcome engagement from data governance experts as we look to stay at the cutting edge of privacy and civil liberties engineering. For the rest of the series, we’ll explore our approaches to promoting privacy, algorithmic safety, and security on our platforms.

We look forward to hearing from you! Reach out to us at media@palantir.com.