Pipeline Builder • Core concepts • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Data connectivity & integration Pipeline Builder Core concepts 

 Core concepts

This page provides an introduction to the core concepts of Foundry data integration that are relevant to Pipeline Builder.

 Build

The concepts of datasets , branches , transforms , and outputs are fundamental to Pipeline Builder. We recommend reviewing these topics before building your first pipeline and as you transform your data and integrate towards pipeline outputs.

 Datasets

Datasets are the building blocks of a pipeline. In the data integration process, data is represented as Foundry datasets from when the data lands in Foundry until the data is mapped into the Ontology object model.

Fundamentally, a Foundry dataset is a wrapper around a collection of files which are stored in a backing file system . Pipeline Builder is primarily intended for structured data but can also be used for semi-structured data.

 Learn more about input datasets in Pipeline Builder. 

 Branches

Version control is crucial to maintaining healthy pipeline workflows. In Pipeline Builder, version control is implemented with pipeline branches , which operate similarly to code branches in Git version control.

A pipeline branch is a copy of the pipeline on which a user can iterate without saving back to the main pipeline, similar to a code branch in Git. Users can make changes, preview, save, and build on their branch. Once they are happy with the changes, they can propose to merge back into the Main branch, similar to merging a Git pull request.

 Learn more about branches in Pipeline Builder. 

 Transforms

A transform can be thought of as a function definition; that is, a transform accepts a set of inputs (such as datasets) and produces a set of outputs. A pipeline is a linkage of datasets, data expectations, and targeted data outputs that are connected by transforms.

 Learn more about transforms in Pipeline Builder. 

 Pipeline outputs

Outputs in Pipeline Builder are the result of transforms performed in the pipeline and can be datasets, virtual tables , or Ontology components such as object types, object link types, or time series. Outputs can be used in other Foundry applications such as Quiver or Code Workbook.

 Learn more about pipeline outputs in Pipeline Builder. 

 Manage

The concepts of schedules and data expectations are useful for maintaining healthy, stable pipelines. We recommend learning more about these topics once you build your first pipeline.

 Schedules

 Schedules are used to run dataset builds on a recurring basis to keep data flowing through Foundry consistently. In Pipeline Builder, builds can be scheduled at a specific time, on a specific cadence, or based on the status of a parent resource; for example, you can set a build to occur when an upstream dataset is updated.

 Learn more about schedules in Pipeline Builder. 

 Data expectations

Pipeline Builder supports data expectations on outputs and intermediate transforms through unit tests. Data expectations are requirements that can be applied to dataset outputs. These requirements (known as "expectations") can be used to create checks that improve data pipeline stability.

Data expectations can be set on each pipeline output to define an expectation on the resulting output. Pipeline Builder currently supports two data expectation types: primary key and row count.

If any expectations fail, the build will be failed. The job expectations pane will show which data expectations passed and failed.

 Learn more about data expectations in Pipeline Builder. 

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Overview 

 NEXT Navigation 
 →