Overview • Ontology • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Overview 

 Ontology building

The Palantir Ontology is an operational layer for the organization. The Ontology sits on top of the digital assets integrated into the Palantir platform ( datasets , virtual tables , and models ) and connects them to their real-world counterparts, ranging from physical assets like plants, equipment, and products to concepts like customer orders or financial transactions. In many settings, the Ontology serves as a digital twin of the organization, containing both the semantic elements (objects, properties, links) and kinetic elements (actions, functions, dynamic security) needed to enable use cases of all types.

 Object and link types

Defining the semantics of your organization happens by mapping existing datasources into objects, properties, and links in the Ontology. Far beyond data cataloging or schema design solutions, the Ontology allows you to define a robust foundation for end-user workflows, including rich metadata for all fields and complete with granular security and governance for all changes.

Learn about creating the semantic elements of the Ontology: object types and link types .

 Action types and functions

The kinetics of the organization—enabling change while complying with organizational controls and governance—are defined in the Ontology using action types and functions . Action types enable you to capture data from operators in your organization or orchestrate decision-making processes that connect to your existing systems, while functions provide a way to author and evolve business logic with arbitrary complexity.

Learn about creating the kinetic elements of the Ontology: action types and functions .

 Interfaces

An interface is an Ontology type that describes the shape of an object type and its capabilities. Interfaces provide object type polymorphism, allowing for consistent modeling of and interaction with object types that share a common shape.

Learn more about interfaces .

 Powering decision-making

The goal of investing in the Ontology is to facilitate better decision-making in an organization at scale. To achieve this, the Ontology is deeply integrated into Palantir's user-facing analytical and operational tools: users can create reusable Object Views, search for objects of interest in Object Explorer, perform complex analyses in Quiver, build high-quality applications in Workshop, and more.

 Learn more about how to leverage the Ontology in user-facing applications. 

Palantir Learning portal

Now that you know the theory, get started on building your first Ontology with our course on learn.palantir.com ↗ .

 NEXT Why create an Ontology? 
 →