Code Repositories • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Data connectivity & integration Code Repositories Overview 

 Code Repositories

To edit and manage your code in a familiar IDE, try VS Code workspaces and the Palantir extension for Visual Studio Code .

 Code Repositories provides a web-based integrated development environment (IDE) for writing and collaborating on production-ready code in Foundry. The application provides a user-friendly way to interact with the underlying Git repository, and provides a range of additional features:

All common Git version control tasks, including branching, committing, and tagging releases can be performed through the web UI

Repositories have integrated support for code review and collaboration through pull requests , including support for highly configurable permissions to ensure the codebase is high-quality

Every repository type includes integrated features to aid with the code authoring experience, including IntelliSense, code linting and error checking, and rich help dialogs

 Repository types

Code Repositories support creating repositories of many types. The most common repository types are described below.

 Transforms repositories support authoring data transformation logic, and include features to enable previewing and debugging transforms. Supported languages include Python , Java , and SQL 

 Functions repositories enable writing business logic that can be executed with low latency in an operational context, and include native support for accessing data from the Foundry Ontology . The Code Repositories environment supports autocomplete based on Ontology data types, and enables code authors to preview Functions while authoring them. Functions can be written in TypeScript or Python .

 Model development is supported in Code Repositories. Learn more about how to develop models in Code Repositories. 

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Pipeline Builder Transforms / Window 

 NEXT Navigation 
 →