Object and link types • Value types • Value type constraints • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Object and link types Value types Value type constraints 

 Value type constraints

Each value type may optionally define a constraint to enforce data validation. You can configure these constraints when creating a new value type in the Value Type Manager application. The available value type constraints, along with what base types they can be applied to, are below:

 Enum (one of): A constraint representing a static set of allowed values.

 Valid base types: String, Boolean, Decimal, Double, Float, Integer, or Short.

For String properties, the enum values may optionally be case-sensitive or case-insensitive.

 Range: A minimum value, maximum value, or range of allowed values.

 Valid base types: Decimal, Double, Float, Integer, Short, Date, Timestamp, String, or Array.

For String properties, the length of the string is constrained.

For Array properties, the size of the array is constrained.

Additionally, the following property types have additional type-specific constraints available:

 String: 

 Regex: A regex pattern that the string must match. The regex validation may optionally pass when matching only a substring of the property value.

 RID: The string must be a valid rid.

 UUID: The string must be a valid UUID.

 Array: 

 Uniqueness: All elements of the array must be unique.

 Nested: A value type constraint can be applied to the elements of the array. For example, a regex constraint could be applied to every string in an array.

 Struct: 

 Element constraints: A mapping between a struct field identifier and a value type reference, where the struct field identifier indicates the struct component to which the referenced value type should be applied.

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Value type permissions 

 NEXT Metadata / Type classes 
 →