Software development kit (SDK) • API Reference • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 
 API Reference 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 User Documentation ↗ 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Index 

 Libraries 

 Transforms 

 REST API 

 Version 2.0 

 Version 1.0 Version 2.0 

 Software development kit (SDK)

 Foundry platform software development kits

The Foundry platform software development kits (SDKs) are libraries designed to simplify building applications that interact with Foundry APIs. These platform SDKs provide a set of tools and utilities that abstract the complexity of the underlying APIs, allowing developers to focus on business logic rather than technical specifics.

 Platform SDK vs. Ontology SDK

Just like platform SDKs provide abstractions on top of Foundry APIs, Ontology SDKs (OSDKs) provide further abstractions on top of platform SDKs.

Platform SDKs are generic libraries that can be used with any Foundry enrollment to interact with all Foundry APIs, including the Ontology. When building an application that involves reading and writing Ontology data, however, you may find that the generic libraries provided by platform SDKs are too low-level, and it would be preferable to interact directly with the objects and Actions defined in your Ontology.

OSDKs are specialized libraries that are generated in your Foundry enrollment, and include code that provides a more intuitive interface for working with the Ontology. For example, if you have an Ontology with an object type called Employee , an OSDK would provide a class called Employee with methods to interact with the Employee object type.

Use the platform SDKs if any of the following apply:

You do not intend to read or write data from the Ontology.

You are automating administrative or governance tasks and workflows.

You are building an application that must be portable between many unrelated Foundry enrollments.

Use an Ontology SDK if:

You are building an application that reads and writes data only from your Ontology.

 SDK Languages

The platform SDK is currently available in the following languages:

 Python 

 TypeScript