Action types • Function-backed actions • Overview • Palantir 

 Search 

 Palantir 

 Documentation 

 Documentation 

 Apollo 

 Gotham 

 Search documentation 

 Search 
 karat 

+

K

 API Reference ↗ Send feedback 

 en 

 en jp kr zh 

 AB XY 

 AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY AB XY 

 Capabilities 

 AI Platform (AIP) 

 Data connectivity & integration 

 Model connectivity & development 

 Ontology building 

 Developer toolchain 

 Use case development 

 Analytics 

 Product delivery 

 Security & governance 

 Management & enablement 

 Getting started 

 Architecture center 

 Platform updates 

 Announcements 

 Release notes 

 Ontology building Action types Function-backed actions Overview 

 Function-backed actions

In an action type, rules define the ways objects should change when the action is applied. Many action types can be defined using simple rules which allow you to create, modify, and delete objects, or create and delete links between objects.

In some cases, however, simple rules are not sufficient to describe the changes that you want to make. For example, you may want to:

Modify multiple objects that are currently linked together. For example, you may want to set the status field of an Incident object to Closed , and also set the status of all linked Alert objects to Resolved .

Modify an object's properties based on some more complex logic. For example, you may want to compute a value based on some business logic that reads data from several objects, then write that value into an object property.

Create several different types of objects and set up links between them.

To support use cases like these, action types can be configured to call a function that defines the logic of how objects should be modified. These action types are often referred to as function-backed actions . By using a function, you can create action types of any level of complexity, reading any number of objects and modifying objects as you see fit.

Although function-backed action types are very flexible, you should note that they are subject to both action type limits and function execution limits .

Get started with function-backed actions by following the tutorial .

 ← 
 PREVIOUS Actions on structs 

 NEXT Getting started 
 →